Three major criticisims are often leveled against empirical conclusions drawn on the validity of the rank size distribution.’ First, the standard statistical procedure for accepting or rejecting the rank size distribution is inadequate (Alperovich [2]). Indeed, applying an improved estimation and testing procedure, which overcomes problems with the standard model, to a sample of 17 countries, Alperovich [3] found that, except for the United States and Poland, the rank size distribution cannot be accepted as a proper representation of city size distributions. Second, accuracy of results leaves much to be desired since most studies employ data on legal cities instead of theoretically required data on urban areas. The latter are simply not available for many countries. Third, scholars necessarily employ truncated samples where observations from the lower tail of the distribution are excluded. This paper is concerned principally with the impact of variations in threshold size of urban areas on estimates of Pareto parameters and the resulting conclusions concerning the validity of the rank size distribution. A subsequent purpose is to compare results obtained using the standard model with those derived from an improved model proposed in Alperovich [3]. From a theoretical point of view, exclusion of observations should present no problem if the behavior of excluded observations, with respect to the rank size distribution, is similar to the behavior of included observations. The issue, however, is not theoretical but empirical and should be settled on empirical grounds. In fact, little analysis was conducted on the sensitivity of Pareto distribution with respect to changes in threshold size. One exception is Malecki’s [6] interesting attempt to use incorporated places in the American Midwest to study this issue. To achieve these goals we use SMSAs data on population in 1970 and 1980. In justifying this choice it is appropriate to emphasize that this study does not attempt to determine the most appropriate area units for which the size distribution applies. This is a rather ambitious task which should be investigated using a completely different methodology. Rather, we accept the leading view that the appropriate area units are urban areas and that SMSAs are closest to the generic concept of urban areas (Mills and Hamilton [7, Chap. 41). Our investigation thus focuses on the impact of truncation of SMSAs on the estimated parameters and test statistics. The major conclusions derived from the analysis can briefly be summarized as follows. First, while the rank size distribution is confirmed by the improved model, it is not supported by the standard model. Second, between 1970 and 1980 population shifts among SMSAs followed a pattern which led the size distribution of SMSAs to converge toward the rank size distribution. Third, while the standard model is highly sensitive to exclusion of SMSAs, the estimates and test statistics of the improved model are relatively robust to exclusion of SMSAs from the lower tail of the distribution. These findings suggest that results reported in much of the literature and conclusions based on them should be approached with caution. They also suggest that future investigations should be conducted via the new model, formulated in terms of relative population size. A goal of this study is to conduct a sensitivity analysis of parameters of Pareto distribution and compare the results obtained using the standard model with those generated by the improved model. Keeping this in mind, it is noteworthy that the main difference between the two models is not the theoretical foundation which is the same but rather the statistical properties involved. In particular, as the following analysis will show, the testing procedures of the standard model are inappropriate and acceptance regions calculated for OLS estimates may not apply. Consequently, results derived with the standard model may be misleading. In contrast, the new model lends itself to a proper testing procedure and acceptance regions calculated present no problem. Let us now present the two models used in the investigation. The Pareto distribution for city-size distributions can be written in the mathematical form, where Rm, and Pm are the rank and population of the city of mth level (m = l,..., M), respectively, A is a parameter, and cy is the Pareto exponent. The rank size distribution, which is claimed in the literature to be a good representation of city-size distribution, can be written in the form, where B is a product of a city’s rank and its population. B does not carry a subscript since according to this formulation it is restricted to being constant regardless of city level m. The standard test on which scholars have based their conclusions refers only to the magnitude of Pareto exponent being equal to one. Unfortunately, it can readily be verified that acceptance of the rank size distribution must follow results of a joint test that (Y= 1 and A = B, since this distribution can still be rejected even when (Yturns out to be statistically not different from a unit (Alperovich [2]). The difficulty can be remedied by using an improved estimating and testing procedure, developed in Alperovich [3]. The new model can be derived in the following way. Suppose that city sizes are generated by Pareto distribution. Using (2) it follows that Since the rank of an mth level city, R, is represented in the model by the number of cities with population Im, or more, we have Substituting (4) into (3) we obtain Equation (5) must hold for every m. Thus, the population of an (m + 1)th level city is given by Dividing (5) by (6) and collecting terms we obtain Equation (7) states that, for city sizes which are generated by the Pareto distribution, the ratio of population of any two consecutive cities must be equal to (1 + l/m)1/alpha. This equation can further be generalized to allow Bm and Bm+1 to be different. Taking the logarithm of both sides of (8) yields Clearly, if the distribution of city size is generated by the rank size distribution Bm must be equal to Bm+1, which implies that the value of the constant in (9) must be equal to zero. Testing for the validity of the rank size distribution can thus proceed by estimating (9) and testing jointly that the constant is equal to zero and the coefficient of ln(Pm/Pm+1) is equal to a unit. Equations (l), in its logarithmic transformation form, and (9) are the standard and new estimated models, respectively. As one can readily see, the former is formulated in terms of levels of population while the latter is formulated in terms of relative sizes of population. A major problem in estimating (1) is heteroscedasticity arising from the proportionality of the error term with the size of population. This is evident when one considers a typical sample of urban areas which includes observations whose sizes are approximately 200 times the size of other observations. As is well known the estimates obtained are not efficient or asymptotically efficient and in many cases the confidence intervals and acceptance regions are narrower than the correct ones.* The respective estimators are presented as having greater precision than is justified by the chosen level of confidence. In contrast, this problem does not exist with (9) formulated in terms of population ratios, which avoids heteroscedasticity. The empirical analysis was carried out via the logarithmic transformation of (1) and (9). These two models were estimated with population data of SMSAs for the years 1970 and 1980. SMSAs are known to correspond closely to the generic notion of urban areas and are most suitable for the type of analysis we are conducting. This fact should not be overlooked. In particular, since the quality of data is assured, poor performance of one model must be connected with its statistical foundations rather than with the quality of the data. To conduct a sensitivity analysis of the parameters of Pareto distribution with respect to exclusion of lower order SMSAs, each equation was estimated intermittently with varying number of observations. The observations used in each regression include all observations of the preceding regression less the five lowest order SMSAs. The statistical results of consecutive regressions differing by less than 30 observations were almost identical. We therefore report only results of regressions where 30 observations are excluded at a time. Table 1 presents estimates derived with (1) for 1980 and 1970, respectively. Columns 4 and 7 display t values corresponding to the test that Pareto exponent, alpha is equal to a unit. Analyzing the results obtained, a few observations are noteworthy. First, the value of R* is very high regardless of the number of observations used. It ranges, with little variability, between a low 0.969 and a high 0.986. These figures imply that the Pareto distribution provides a very accurate description of the distribution of population sizes of urban areas. In view of ample results reported in the literature, this is expected and does not constitute a new finding. Second, since there is no reason to suspect that some observations are of poor quality or do not belong to the model, the best estimates of parameters of the distribution will be obtained when all SMSAs are used. Accordingly, the estimated Pareto exponent is 0.971 for 1980 and 0.950 for 1970. Numerically, these estimates are close to a unit yet, as is evident by the t values, statistically we cannot accept the hypothesis that alpha is equal to 1. Based on (1) we therefore reject that the rank size rule is an accurate representation of the distribution of urban areas in 1980 as well as in 1970. A somewhat similar result is reported by Mills and Hamilton [7] where the estimated a turned out 0.905 and it was significantly different from 1. As was explained previously the confidence intervals in both cases may be incorrect due to heteroscedasticity leading to rejection of alpha = 1. On inspecting point estimates derived for 1970 and 1980 it is readily seen that the distribution of SMSAs has changed in such a way that in 1980 it was closer to the rank size distribution than it was in 1970.4 Evidently, trends in population shifts among SMSAs between 1970 and 1980 were such that the system converged toward the rank size distribution. Third, and more important to our study, as more and more lower order SMSAs are excluded the estimates of both cyand the constant increase monotonically in 1980 and in 1970. In 1980 the estimate of cyincreases from a low 0.971, when all SMSAs are used, to a high 1.61 when only the 30 highest order SMSAs are used. Likewise, in 1970 it increases from a low 0.949 to a high 1.425. A Pareto exponent which is smaller than 1 means either that population of SMSAs far down in the size distribution are smaller or population of SMSAs far up in the size distribution are bigger than is indicated by the rank size rule. Consequently, as more and more observations from the lower tail of the distribution are excluded the estimate of the slope of the function increases monotonically. As figures reported in columns 3, 4, 6, and 7 of Table 1 show, this is the case in the present application. Except for the regressions with 300 observations in 1980 and 270 observations in 1970, the estimate of (Y is significantly different from a unit, regardless of the number of observations used. All taken into consideration, these findings show that the standard model is extremely sensitive to exclusion of lower order SMSAs. Estimates derived are biased and the magnitude of the bias increases with the number of excluded observations. The bias, in our case, is less than 10% when the number of excluded SMSAs is smaller than 108, but it rises at increasing rates when additional SMSAs are excluded. Let us now look at the analogous results obtained with (9). The estimates obtained are displayed in Tables 2 and 3, which report results derived with 1980 and 1970 data, respectively. It can readily be seen that R2 values obtained with this model are significantly smaller than corresponding R2 values derived with the standard model. This difference in magnitude stems from the fact that one set of estimates is based on levels of population while the second set of estimates is based on relative populations. Notwithstanding the difference, considering that we deal with cross-section analyses and 318 observations, these R2 values are respectable. We now turn to results of the sensitivity analysis. As can be seen in Tables 2 and 3, the results derived with the new model are very encouraging. The average value of a in 1980 is 0.981, when all entries are taken into consideration, and is 0.998 when the estimate obtained with only 30 observations is discarded. Likewise, the analogous figures for 1970 are 0.890 and 0.903, respectively. Disregarding the estimate based on only 30 SMSAs, OLranges in 1980 between 0.928 and 1.026 with little variability and between 0.851 and 0.924, also with little variability, in 1970. Thus, except for the extreme cases when 287 out of 317 observations are excluded, the estimate of cr derived with the improved model is relatively insensitive to exclusion of lower tail observations. Furthermore, inspecting the F values calculated under the joint hypothesis that alpha = 1 and ln( Bm+1 / Bm) = 0, and displayed in column 4 of Tables 2 and 3, and noting that F0.05(2; 120) = 3.07, it is the case that regardless of the number of observations used we cannot reject the joint hypothesis. Thus, exclusion of lower order SMSAs does not alter the fundamental conclusion that the rank size distribution is an appropriate representation of the size distribution of urban areas. The fact that the estimates are robust to exclusion of observations provides an explanation of the finding that the rank size distribution was confirmed in a study by Alperovich [3] in which United Nations data on U.S. population of cities with 100,000 inhabitants and more were used. It is noteworthy that, except for the extreme case where only 30 observations are used, overestimation or underestimation of a is kept below 6% in 1980 and 11% in 1970. When only 30 observations are used, alpha is underestimated by 15.3% in 1980 and by 16.1% in 1970. These figures compare extremely favorably with corresponding figures obtained via the standard model, where both in 1980 and 1970 the estimate of alpha increases monotonically as more and more SMSAs are deleted. In extreme cases in 1980 when only the 90,60, and 30 highest order SMSAs are used (alpha is overestimated by 31, 42, and 66% respectively. The analogous overestimation figures in 1970 are 28, 39, and 50%. In less extreme cases when 180 or less observations are used, the average overestimation of a in 1980 and 1970 is higher than 11%. A major conclusion which emerges from these figures is that exclusion of SMSAs from the lower tail of the distribution leads to distortion of the estimates of alpha.The distortion is considerably high when the standard model is used and is fairly low when the new model is used. Through the years a large body of empirical literature has appeared which claims that the so-called rank size distribution is an accurate representation of city-size distribution of many countries. Theoretical reasons do not determine unequivocally the proper area units for which this distribution should apply. For reasons of convenience and data availability many studies utilized truncated samples which include only area units from a given size and up. Such practices may be unfortunate because estimates derived when observations from the lower tail of the distribution are excluded may be biased and conclusions based on them may therefore be misleading. In this paper we investigated the impact of exclusion of observations from the lower tail of the distribution on the estimated parameters and test statistics. For this purpose two competing estimation procedures were applied to data on population sizes of SMSAs in 1980 and 1970. The principal findings of the foregoing analysis can briefly be summarized as follows. First, using the popular estimation procedure which relies on population levels, we cannot accept the rank size distribution as an accurate representation of the size distribution of urban areas. This result is obtained despite the fact that the point estimates of cyare 0.971 in 1980 and 0.950 in 1970. In contrast, when the new model formulated in terms of relative population sizes is used, the rank size distribution is not rejected. Second, between 1980 and 1970 trends in population shifts among SMSAs were such that the distribution converged toward the rank size distribution. Third, there is a stark difference in results of the sensitivity analysis derived with the popular estimation procedure and those derived with the revised version. In particular, the estimates of Pareto exponent and the test statistics derived using the standard model are sensitive to omission of SMSAs from the lower tail of the distribution. The bias observed is substantial when 150 or more SMSAs are excluded. In contrast, the estimates and test statistics derived with the new model are robust to exclusion of lower order SMSAs. Alperovich [3] has shown that the new model should be preferred to the standard model on grounds that the latter does not lend itself to an appropriate testing procedure of the rank size distribution. The findings of this study provide another justification for preferring the new model. 