Two questions have been of long-standing interest to urban economists: the first concerns how cities of different sizes grow relative to each other, the second concerns which theoretical distribution provides the best approximation for the empirical city size distribution. Regarding the former question, most empirical studies suggest that the relative size and rank of cities remain stable over time. Eaton and Eckstein (1997) favored a parallel growth pattern over divergent or convergent growth patterns for French and Japanese cities. Black and Henderson (1999) constructed a theoretical model to explain the parallel growth rates of cities and found support for this pattern in data on U.S. cities. Overman and Ioannides (2001) developed a stochastic transition kernel for the evolution of the distribution of U.S. metropolitan area populations from 1900 to 1990 and produced results suggesting persistence in the city size distribution. Dobkins and Ioannides (2000) studied the dynamic evolution of the city size distribution in U.S. and confirmed that the city growth in U.S. is relatively stable over time. Sharma (2003) found that the growth of cities in India may be parallel in the long-run but with short-run deviations from the long-term pattern. With respect to the second question, the dominating view in the literature is that the Pareto distribution fits best. The idea, mentioned as early as Auerbach (1913), was propagated by Zipf (1949) who claimed that not only does the size distribution of cities follow a Pareto law, but also the distribution has a shape parameter of 1. In empirical studies, when cities are ordered by population size, regressing the logarithm of their rank on the logarithm of their size yields a slope coefficient close to minus one in so many instances that the phenomena has acquired the status of the eponymous Zipf’s law. Taking exponents, the relationship can be seen to be a special case of a power rule relating the size rank of a city to some power of its population size rendering the statistical distribution appropriate for the relationship a member of the family due to Pareto (1897) more commonly employed in modeling income distributions. More generally, the Pareto exponents generated from the rank size regression are not necessarily equal to unity, and this so-called brank size ruleQ is believed to be applicable to almost all countries around world. Rosen and Resnick (1980) estimated the Pareto exponent for 44 countries. Their estimates ranged from 0.81 to 1.96, with a sample mean of 1.14. Soo (in press) investigated a new data set of 75 countries and found the average value of Pareto exponent is 1.1, which is significantly greater than 1 predicted by Zipf’s law. The rank size regression has also been extended to test the validity of the Pareto specification. Ioannides and Overman (2003) used a nonparametric procedure to estimate Gibrat’s law for city growth processes and their results favored Zip’s law. The rank size rule emerged from regularly observed features of the data and lacked any economic theoretic foundation. Recently, Gabaix and Ioannides (2004) outlined economic urban agglomeration models by Gabaix (1999), Cordoba (2003), Rossi-Hansberg and Wright (2004) each of which, under various assumptions about city size shocks, deliver Zipf’s law. Duranton (2002) embeds a quality ladder model of growth in an urban framework, it does not produce Zipf’s law but it does produce simulations that are well approximated by a log normal distribution. This paper exploits Chinese data to investigate these two general issues regarding the city size distribution. There are three reasons why the experience of China is of interest. First, most empirical studies in this topic focus on the developed countries and, as a developing country with the largest population and a rapid urbanization process, China provides a "non-developed" comparison case. Secondly, over the last 30 years, China has experienced substantial economic and social reforms including a transition toward a market economy where human capital flows more freely, integration into the world economy where access to foreign markets matters and the introduction of bThe One Child PolicyQ which changed the structure of random shocks that city sizes are subject to. Whether such fundamental reforms induced changes in the city size distributions is of interest. Thirdly, China has experienced very rapid urbanization process since 1980, with the development of a large number of new cities. This is significantly different from the stable city growth processes in most countries, where the main channel of urban growth is the expansion of existing cities rather than the birth of new ones. Indeed a critical element of the Gabaix (1999) argument is that the rate of growth in the number of cities does not exceed the population growth rate and it is instructive to observe the consequences for the theory when this condition is not met. This paper draws two substantive conclusions. First, in examining the evolution of the Chinese urban system over time, it finds that economic reforms engendered a structural change in the city size distribution. In the pre-reform period the city size distribution is relatively stable while in post-reform period there is a significant convergence trend in city growth. Secondly, alternative functional forms suggested by theory were examined to see which provided the best approximation to the distribution of city sizes. Rather than relying on the value of a regression coefficient as evidence of a distributional form, maximum likelihood estimates of the parameters of theoretically relevant distributions were developed and their congruence with the data was examined directly via Pearson goodness-of-fit tests.1 The results strongly reject various power law specifications (and consequently of Zipf’s law) for China and indicate that Gibrat’s law appears to describe the situation well prior to the economic reform and Kalecki’s reformulation appears to be appropriate in the post reform period. The paper is organized as follows: Section 2 provides some background to the Chinese city data utilized in the study. Recent economic theories of city size as they relate to the case of China are considered in Section 3. Section 4 describes the evolution process of Chinese urban system and details of the various distributions are outlined and examined for their empirical coherence. Conclusions are drawn in Section 5. In China "cities" are defined as "urban places" corresponding to local administrative and jurisdictional entities. There are three different administrative levels of cities in the Chinese urban system: municipalities (or province-level cities), prefecture-level cities and county-level cities. Small settlements with townships or lower administrative levels are not treated as "cities". The major administrative criteria distinguishing cities, towns and rural places is the scale of urban population, in particular there is a lower population boundary for cities. The economic and political importance of an urban agglomeration is also one of the government’s considerations in defining cities. However the definition of cities has generally been consistent since 1949, when the People’s Republic of China was established.2 This administratively defined "city proper" is not as appropriate for economic analysis as "metropolitan areas" which are defined as collections of contiguous urban places. The most important limitation being that city boundaries are administratively defined, thus contiguous urban clusters may be artificially separated. Also this "city proper" definition may only represent a "traditional" downtown area and exclude suburbs. Since small settlements such as towns and villages are not treated as cities, and information of them is not available, aggregation of central cities and suburbs into metropolitan areas is not possible. To alleviate the limitations of this "administrative" definition and to construct time-consistent data, we adopt the official criteria announced in 1963 defining a city as an urban agglomeration with a total urban population larger than 100,000 inhabitants. This exogenous lower size boundary has important implications for our study. First, a few small sized urban places defined as cities for political reasons are excluded from the sample because it’s hard to distinguish them from other small settlements.3 Second, for the same reason cities exit the sample if they decline below this boundary. Third, when original small settlements expand beyond this boundary, they enter the sample as new cities. Information on the population of all Chinese cities from 1990 to 1999 is compiled from the Chinese Urban Statistical Yearbooks (State Statistical Bureau, 1991–2000). Information on city populations from 1949 to 1990 is reported in Forty Years of Urban Development (State Statistical Bureau, 1990). For cities at the prefecture level and above information on both bShiquQ (urban area) and Diqu (urban area and rural counties) are reported, only urban area (Shiqu) city information is used here. We choose 1949, the birth of the Republic, as the starting point of the sample. Economic reforms began at the end of 1970s and accelerated the urbanization progress in China. Roughly speaking 10- year intervals were chosen for the pre-reform period (1949–1980) and 5-year intervals for reform period (1980–1999). Table 1 provides a background summary of the change in the number and average size of Chinese cities from 1949 to 1999. Due largely to the introduction of the "One Child Policy" the population growth rate dropped precipitously after the late 1970s while, after a decline in the 1960s reflecting the "back to the land" policies of that era, the proportion of the population that was urbanized grew substantially, especially in the economic reform period of the 1980s and 1990s. There appears to be three stages of city growth. The first stage is one of stable growth from 1949 to 1961; the second is a stagnation stage, from 1961 to 1978; and the third is a rapid expansion stage coincident with the economic reforms which started in 1978. A striking feature of the data is the large number of new cities, especially in the reform period. In the pre-reform period the number of cities annually increases by about 5.5%, in the reform period the growth rate increases to 11.4%. Thus in large part urbanization in China takes the form of the formation of new cities, a quite different experience from that of developed countries, where urbanization mainly comes from the expansion of existing cities. It is worthy of note that, in part as a response to political concerns regarding threats from countries to the west, almost all new city development was in the Central and Western regions in the pre-reform period whereas in the reform period the Eastern region is the main area of new city development. Another important pattern worthy of note is that the standard deviation of city size decreases after 1980 with average size growing steadily over time. This implies a city size convergence trend not unlike r-convergence observed in economic growth and income distribution analysis. Gabaix (1999) introduces proportionate city population shocks into a model of city size by positing amenity shocks to cities which, given a freely mobile labour force, engender inter-city migration. Such shocks bring about city size distributions which follow Gibrats law of log normality, however, by also positing a reflective lower bound for these shocks, city size distributions take a very specific form of the Pareto power law with a coefficient of 1. In a similar fashion, Cordoba (2003) finds that Pareto distributions for city sizes require that all cities have the same growth rate and that either the preferences for different goods follow reflected random walks (and substitution elasticities between goods is one) or different goods total factor productivity’s each follow reflected random walks with increasing returns equal across goods. Again the crucial ingredient for the power law is the existence of a reflective lower boundary. Duranton (2002) embeds a quality ladder model of growth in an urban framework, cities grow or decline as they win or lose industries following new innovations so that small technology shocks are the main engine of growth. Since there is no reflective lower boundary in this model, it does not produce Zipf’s law (Pareto distributions for city sizes) but, as the author notes, it does produce simulations that are well approximated by a log normal distribution. Rossi-Hansberg and Wright (2004) propose a model in which urban structure delivers a balance in the tension between the increasing returns to scale gained from conurbations and the constant returns to scale required in the aggregate by balanced growth. Shocks in this environment are finite order, finite moment industry specific Markov shocks to productivity. Under some strong assumptions (either that there is no physical capital or production is linear in physical capital with no human capital) and by imposing a lower bound on the normalized process of city growth, it produces Zipf’s law exactly. More generally, it produces deviations from Zipf’s law in which small and large cities are under-represented, in essence the process displays a reversion to mean property. An interesting feature of the model in the present context is that the condition guaranteeing a constant number of cities over time is that human capital growth exceeds population growth. The introduction of independent proportionate shocks into a model is effectively an application of bla loi de l’effet proportionnelQ employed in other contexts by Gibrat (1930, 1931). Gibrat’s law applied to city sizes is based on the premise that the initial city size variate P0 is subject to a sequence of mutually independent proportionate changes  so that after the passage of time t. Assuming |vi| is small relative to 1 and letting l where lk is an i.i.d. process with zero mean and variance r2 which is small relative to 1 then: with l (again small relative to one) corresponding to the incremental drift or growth in city size and ut corresponding to the increment of a drifting Weiner process which, after sufficient passage of time t, renders the distribution of lnP as . In this framework the progress of city size is a random walk with drift, there is no long-run bequilibriumQ city size that is the consequence of economic and physical forces, rather the theory tells us about how the process is incrementing and that the variance of city sizes will increase over time. Subsequently, by sacrificing the initial size independence assumption, Kalecki (1945) modified Gibrat’s contribution to admit log normality with a non-increasing variance. He proposed an alternative process which, in the present context, replaces Eq. (1) with: where 1NkN0. Kalecki establishes that, after a sufficient passage of time, the distribution of lnP will be . Again l may be construed as the incremental growth component but in this case the logarithm of the proportionate change in P is negatively related to lnP via 􏰅k, note also the variance of the process is constant. Unlike Gibrat’s model, economic forces are at work here determining equilibrium city size, albeit in a simplistic fashion, since Eq. (2) may be re-written as a partial adjustment model with  as the target or equilibrium city size and k as the adjustment rate. In case (1) city size distributions are divergent through time and in case (2) city size distribution may be thought of as convergent or at least non-divergent in the sense that whilst both models predict increasing means Eq. (1) predicts increasing dispersion whereas Eq. (2) does not. The distinction between the two is important because the former predicts a distribution that advances in an unbounded fashion whereas the latter predicts a distribution whose location trends through time with the growth rate but whose variance is bounded. Obviously neither the Gibrat nor Kalecki models are consistent with the Pareto distribution.4 Gabaix (1999), and also Cordoba (2003) and Rossi-Hansberg and Wright (2004), establish the link by positing that the Geometric Brownian Motion describing city size processes is subject to a reflective lower bound. Gabaix demonstrates that, provided the growth rate of the number of cities does not exceed the growth rate of their populations, the rank size distribution with a coefficient of one emerges as a consequence. The introduction of a lower reflective boundary to processes such as Eqs. (1) and (2) so that the logarithm of city size is not permitted to fall below some fixed lower bound lnpmin causes the city size distribution to take the power form of a Pareto distribution with a probability density f. Without the lower bound, city size would follow Gibrat’s law of proportionate effects. Reed (2001, 2002) proposes a closely related model with the same unbounded Brownian motion but, under an assumption that cities have existed for a period T where T is governed by an exponential distribution, develops a double Pareto distribution for city size. This distribution yields a rank order rule for both upper and lower tails of the distribution, respectively, of the form: Maximum likelihood estimates for a, b and p* are readily obtained from Eq. (3). In this case city size follows a power law in both tails. Again for fixed T, city size would follow Gibrat’s law. Adapting these models to model the progress of Chinese city size distributions is difficult. From the onset of the Republic to the introduction of Reforms in 1978, China was very much a closed command economy where labor was not free to flow between cities or between urban and rural sites and few of the assumptions required for the models prevailed. During this time there were no constraints on fertility (indeed population growth was positively encouraged during the earliest part of the Cultural Revolution) but there was a bReturn to the LandQ policy wherein substantial portions of the urban population were removed to rural areas and the authorities had a very deliberate policy of developing cities in the interior for political reasons. Cities were not competing for new technologies and were probably being sustained in their absence, the lack of freely flowing human capital meant that amenity cost disparities could not be responded to. City sizes were still subject to independent proportional shocks due to the vagaries of climate, population growth, etc. but it is hard to rationalize policy making in the context of an economic model during this period. With the reforms beginning in 1978, China opened up to trade, loosened the restrictions on intercity migration, and abandoned the policy of deliberate city development in the interior, almost coincidentally it also introduced the "One Child Family Policy". The introduction of the reforms and the fertility policy in some sense took the form of a large scale bnatural experimentQ so that a structural break in the progress of city sizes is to be expected around the late 1970s. With regard to the economic reforms there was a new found spirit of competition for foreign markets so that some of the preconditions for the above cited city size models began to prevail. However those theories do need to be augmented in order to explain the inordinate growth in new cities during the reform period so that some notion of the propensity for city births needs to be added. It is reasonable to assume that a considerable disparity between urban and rural labor productivity had been engendered by the restrictions imposed in the pre-reform period, so that considerable gains were to be made by rapid urbanization. These could be realized one of two ways, either by augmenting existing city populations or by initiating new cities. A putty-clay technology for cities (Ottaviano and Thisse, 2001) would militate against augmenting existing city populations, since diminishing productivity returns had already set in and short-run congestion and amenity costs would increase considerably at the margin. As for initiating new cities, the geographic advantages of the Eastern Coastal region with its proximity to the newly liberated international trading routes, probably offer greater net productivity gains and precipitated more rapid new city development than in other regions. Thus while some reliance can be placed on the above mentioned economic models of city size, it is probably appropriate to view this period as one of adjustment from what was a position of extreme disequilibrium at the onset of the period and it is probably the case that it is an adjustment process that has not yet fully played itself out. The introduction of an effective "One Child per Family Policy" in the late 1970s changed fundamentally the nature of population growth, especially in the cities where the policy was most effectively monitored. Essentially the proportionate shocks to the model (the  implicit in Eqs. (1) and (2)) have themselves suffered a structural change in the birth component of the shock. Simple statistical birth models (see, for example, Whittle, 1970, p. 144) based upon a population size n at time t=0 with fertility intensity n predict, after time lapse t, a negative binomial population distribution with a mean and variance of  and , respectively. The important point for present considerations being that a reduction in fertility lowers not only the population growth rate but also the population variance, thus the predictions of Gibrat’s law and Kalecki’s modification also need to be qualified. In the case of the Gibrat model a reduction in the variance of the shock process by d would attenuate the growth rate in the variance of city sizes by r whereas in the Kalecki formulation it would bring about a systematic reduction in the city size variance over time t of the form d. The evolution of city size distributions depends upon two separate processes: the expansion or shrinkage of existing cities and the city birth process. Most studies of developed countries focus on the growth of existing cities because of the extremely low birth rates of new cities. In the rapid urbanization process of China, new cities play an important role in shaping the city size distribution. To explore the growth pattern of existing cities, a balanced panel data set excluding all new cities formed and all cities that deceased between 1961 and 1999 is constructed.5 A parallel study of both the balanced and complete sample is employed. First, the conventional rank size regression is employed to examine the evolution of the Pareto exponent over time. Year 1980, the first observation in the reform years, is chosen to be the benchmark. Time dummies and interaction terms are included to capture the different intercepts and slopes in each year from 1980. The result is reported in Table 2. Columns 2 and 4 of Table 2 report the estimated coefficients for the complete sample. As may be observed, in 1980 there is a significant structural break in the evolution of the Pareto exponent h. For the pre-reform period, 1949–1980, the estimated h is not statistically significantly different from 􏰅1 at the 1% level. From 1980 to 1999, the size distribution of the cities is increasingly convergent except for a slight reversal from 1994 to 1999. The Pareto exponents are significantly higher than 1 in the reform period, which implies that the distribution of city size has become more equal than Zipf’s law would predict. The intercepts are subject to more variation since they are directly dependent on the sample sizes in each year. This pattern is different from the parallel growth pattern of developed countries (Eaton and Eckstein, 1997; Dobkins and Ioannides, 2000). The results for 149 existing cities, which are reported in columns 6 and 8, support a significant convergence trend in both pre-reform and reform period. Simple plots of rank size functions reveal these patterns. Fig. 1(A) shows the shift of rank size function over time for 149 existing cities. The rank size curves have become flatter implying a consistent convergence trend over time. Fig. 1(B) shows the pattern for the complete sample. The rank size curves in 1949 and 1980 have similar shape, while the curve in 1999 becomes significantly flatter. Non-parametric kernel density estimates of the relative city size distribution illustrate the patterns indicated in the foregoing parametric analysis; Fig. 2 shows the relative size distributions in 1949, 1980 and 1999. The main finding is consistent with the patterns revealed in previous parametric analysis. The distributions in 1949 and 1980 are quite similar, while the central mass significantly increased in the 1999 distribution. Quah (1993) introduced Markov chain methods to analyze the transition between these relative size distributions, here Dobkins and Ioannides (2000) is followed in assuming the size distribution of existing cities follows a first-order homogeneous Markov process. Panels A and B of Table 3 report the average decade transition matrix in the pre-reform and reform periods, respectively. The chosen intervals were based on 1/4, 1/2, 3/4, 1 and 2 times the sample mean. Two features stand out. First, the diagonal entries indicate that larger cities have higher persistence and smaller cities are more likely to move to upper categories. The trend of upward concentration is more significant in the pre-reform period than in the reform period which could be due to new entries in the lower tail. To examine this, the balanced panel of 149 cities existing from 1961 to 1999 is employed to calculate the distribution abstracted from new entries and exits. The results, not reported here,6 indicate that a significant concentration toward the upper tail of the distribution remains, suggesting real growth in city size as well as new entrants is causing the phenomenon (a pattern quite different from that of France and Japan (Eaton and Eckstein, 1997)). A second feature is apparent in the last row of the table which shows the frequency distribution of new entrants. The relative size of new cities is significantly different before and after 1980. In the pre-reform period, 77% of new cities are smaller than half of the mean. In the reform period, 79% of new cities are medium size (from half the mean to twice the mean). Recalling that the observation interval in the reform period is 10 years or shorter this is truly remarkable. It implies that settlements too small to be classified as cities in the distribution at the onset of the interval between observation periods have grown to such a size as to merit their entrance in the middle of the distribution within 10 years. Combinations of the growth processes of existing cities and the pattern of new entrants explain the difference in city size evolution in pre-reform and post-reform periods. In the pre-reform period, the new entrants concentrate in the lower tail and raise the relative size ranking of existing cities. For existing cities, small cities expand into the middle range with the big cities in the upper tail exhibiting strong downward immobility. The combination of these two movements results in a relatively stable size distribution which is not significantly different from the prediction of Zipf’s law. In the reform period, the existing small cities grow faster than larger cities and new entrants concentrate around the middle size. As a result, the size distribution exhibits a strong convergence trend. It has been common in empirical work in this field to interpret results of rank size regressions reported in Table 2 as evidence favoring the Pareto distribution and in particular as support for Zipf’s law. However they do not constitute tests of the assumption that the data are generated by a Pareto distribution. Furthermore they only constitute an indirect test of Zipf’s law in that, whilst the regression coefficient may not be significantly different from one, the underlying distribution may not be Pareto. As a consequence, efficient OLS estimates together with maximum likelihood estimates of the Pareto coefficients together with the corresponding goodness-of-fit tests (Pearson, 1900) are reported in Table 4. In addition the table reports maximum likelihood estimates of the log normal and double Pareto models together with the corresponding goodness-of-fit tests. The first thing to note is that the maximum likelihood estimates and the restricted regression estimates for the Pareto coefficient are consistently lower than the standard OLS estimates in Table 2 and uniformly lower than 1 in absolute value. The Zipf’s restriction (h=1) is rejected in every instance except 1949. In addition the goodness-of-fit tests strongly reject the Pareto Distribution hypothesis in all but the 1949 observation set. With respect to the double Pareto estimates in the first three observation years the information matrix is singular with the estimates converging to a single rather than double Pareto specification. Apart from estimates of p* (which are closely related to the sample means), parameter estimates change little from period to period relative to their standard deviation in the remaining years, again the goodness-of-fit tests strongly reject the double Pareto hypothesis. With regard to the Gibrat and Kalecki log normality specifications, the goodness-of-fit tests, with one exception (1980) fail to reject the null hypothesis of log normality at the 1% level, suggesting that the log normal model is a much better rationalization of the data.7 The mean of the distribution indicates annualized percentage city size growth rates between successive observation periods of 0.73, 􏰅0.78, 1.84, 4.08, 4.34, 3.57 and 0.30 assuming a Gibrat process and 1.24, 􏰅0.45, 1.64, 2.87, 3.02, 2.66 and 0.47 assuming a Kalecki process. One aspect is perplexing for advocates of the Gibrat model, namely the diminishing estimates of the standard deviation over time from 1970 onwards. Under the Geometric Brownian Motion assumption the sample standard deviation is an estimate of rMT and should be increasing with the passing of time. The unprecedented urbanization rates in China, especially during the reform period, meant that in some sample years new cities represent an increase of 50% in the sample. Table 5 reports the results corresponding to Table 4 when the sample is restricted to cities that have remained in the sample from 1961 to 1999, a panel of existing cities as it were. The results are unaltered in substance, Pareto and double Pareto specifications are strongly rejected by the data whereas log normality appears to accord with the data extremely well throughout the period. City size growth rates are of a similar magnitude to the full sample, though the average city size is larger, consistent with them being the longer lived cities. The phenomenon of the diminishing standard deviation of city sizes after the 1970s is also still conspicuous though not as strong. The full sample results are illustrated in Figs. 3–6 for 1949, 1980, 1990 and 1999, respectively, which overlay kernel estimates of the empirical probability distribution function on respective plots of the estimated Pareto, double Pareto and log normal distribution functions. Perusal of the diagrams makes it quite clear how it is that the log normal formulation best fits the data. Kernel estimates of the distributions always generate modal points above the minimum city size (unlike the Pareto distribution) and the modal points always appear to be points of continuity (unlike the double Pareto distribution). The close proximity of the log normal distribution to the kernel density estimate (relative to the other distributions) in each case attests to it providing the best fit. The issue remains as to whether convergence or divergence underlays the data generating process for China. The standard F-test for variance ratios is notoriously bad when the underlaying data generating processes diverge from normality (Anderson, 2001), furthermore divergence or polarization need not result in increased variances (Wolfson, 1994). The problem may be resolved by resorting to modifications of a test analogous to the goodness-of-fit test (herein denoted PAT for Pearson Analogue Test) used to examine the similarity between two samples (Anderson, 2001, 2004). Letting OkA be the observed proportion of observations in sample A falling in the kth region, OkB the corresponding value in sample B and Jk the proportion of observations falling in the kth region when the samples are pooled, the test may be formulated as: and it is distributed as  under the null that the samples are drawn from the same distribution. In this case small values of the test statistic correspond to coherence between the distributions underlaying the two samples and large values correspond to differences in the two underlaying distributions. When A and B correspond to time indices, modifications of this test (essentially by employing particular linear combinations of elements in the sum, see Anderson, 2004 for details) may be used to examine whether a distribution is diverging or polarizing over time whether due to the tails of the distribution moving apart or to there being increased concentration in them. To establish divergence when progressing from A to B the test has to be used twice, once to bnot rejectQ divergence in moving from A to B and once to reject divergence from B to A. The results are reported in Table 6. Assuming divergence in distribution to be reflected in increased variances a simple F-test is appropriate, column 2 of Table 6 reports this. As may be observed the test is unable to detect any discernable change in variance from period to period except for 1985 to 1990 and 1990 to 1994 when variance reductions were indicated at the 5% level. As noted earlier this test has notoriously bad size and power properties and divergence need not imply variance change. Columns 3 through 6 of Table 6 report the details of divergence tests of the first and second order which, when considered at the 5% critical level, indicate no divergence or convergence from 1949 through to 1980 and convergence of both types (tails getting closer together and appearing less concentrated) from 1980 through to 1994 with divergence occurring from 1994 to 1999. It may be concluded that convergence appears to be the predominant force in the economic reform period suggesting that the Kalecki formulation rather than Gibrats formulation underlays the city size data generating process. Thus Chinese cities may be thought of as converging to an equilibrium city size which is itself trending upward through time. Whilst data on Chinese city sizes yield results for commonly employed rank size regressions that accord with the conventional wisdom of a Pareto distribution, closer examination reveals the Chinese case to be substantially different with evidence strongly favoring a log normal distribution. The two distributions are linked. Describing the progress of city sizes through time by a Geometric Brownian Motion engenders a log normal city size distribution at a given point in time. Gabaix (1999) demonstrates that, when the Geometric Brownian Motion is constrained by a lower reflective boundary, a Pareto city size distribution at a given point in time results, moreover the Pareto coefficient will equal 1 when the growth rate of new cities is smaller than the growth rate of city sizes. It would be simple to conclude that the lower reflective boundary is ineffective in the Chinese case but the evidence casts doubt upon this. The log normal distribution that derives from a Geometric Brownian Motion process has an upward trending mean and variance (Gibrat’s law) following from the independence of the process from initial city size. The evidence here suggests a constant or declining variance in all but two short intervals (1961–1970 and 1994–1999) with the declines being more apparent in the Economic Reform and One Child Policy period. This is more in line with Kalecki’s specification of the city size process which admits dependence between growth rates and city sizes through time but still generates log normality in the cross-sectional distribution and admits a diminishing variance. The results are also consistent with an error process (the city size shocks) that itself suffered a structural change in the late 1970s in the form of a mean and variance reduction, the result of the introduction of the bOne Child PolicyQ in the late 1970s. Thus the progress of the variance of city sizes is consistent with Kalecki’s version of Gibrats model. In its turn the reduction of the mean component was swamped by the profound urbanization rates of the 1980s and 1990s themselves a response to the considerable disparity between urban and rural labor productivity built up in the pre-reform period. In this formulation there is an equilibrium city size that could be trending upwards through time (the result of technological innovation, etc.) but the variance of city sizes would be constant or diminishing throughout the adjustment process. An additional striking feature of the reform period is the emergence of new cities in the middle of the distribution, the consequence of incredibly rapid growth in the early life of new entrant cities. This is not a feature of the pre-reform period where a steady, but statistically insignificant, increase in the variance of the distribution is observed and new entrants appear at the lower end of the size distribution. This contrast is more striking given the attenuated gap between observation periods in the reform period. Attributing a putty-clay technology to cities explains this response to the urban–rural labor productivity gap, the greatest growth rate in new cities appeared in the Eastern Coastal region where the greatest gains were to be had. This growth in the numbers of cities is also important since a precondition for Zipf’s law in Gabaix (1999) is that the growth in the number of new cities should not exceed the growth in city sizes. In the case of China it does throughout the observation period. All in all Chinese city size distributions appear to differ substantially from the conventional wisdom that is embodied in Zipf’s law and appear to have been affected in a predictable fashion by the Economic Reform and One Child Per Family policies to the extent that a structural change does appear to have occurred at the onset of the reform period. 