We do not have space to attempt a review of the enormous body of research on the rank-size rule, but Parr (1969) is an early element of the theoretical discussion of city size hierarchy, and important recent contributions have come from Gabaix (1999), Reed (2002), and Dobkins/Ioannides (2000). The literature has recently `come to life' again, with contributions of both theoretical and empirical form. The principal theoretical insight has been the understanding of the extent to which the RSR is simply a statistical phenomenon with virtually no empirical (or economic, or regional science) content. In particular, Reed (2002) and Gabaix (1999) stressed that if urban growth rates obeyed the Gibrat Law, i.e. had a statistical distribution whose mean and variance did not vary with urban size, then the rank- size rule evolves dynamically purely as a side effect of the Gibrat law. Reed (ibid) also found that the rank-size relationship could slope with different signs, depending on which tail of the distribution one is examining. Estimations of the RSR function over time are also common (e.g. Guérin-Pace (1995)). Much of the literature is based on US metropolitan area data, largely because consistent SMSA definitions have been reported for the urban areas (with core cities over 50,000 population) since 1950 as part of the US Census. A recent French-based research project, GEOPOLIS, has used satellite photography to define a database of worldwide urban areas, using a morphological criterion. I am not aware of detailed description of the source in English, but Moriconi-Ebrard (2000) makes it clear (ibid, p.24) that a 200m. distance cut-off between built-up areas of an agglomeration plays the crucial role. That is, a metropolitan area is made up of local authority areas, and a local authority area is included if its largest built up component is not separated by more than 200m. from the built up part of the core city or other linked areas. This of course is not based on commuting links, the way the US definition is, or any other form of economic linkage. But it has the great advantage of being internationally uniform, and available for European metropolitan areas. We wanted to make use of the GEOPOLIS data base to produce simple RSR estimations for those countries in which adequate data had been made available, and add square and cubic terms to the specification. This would enable us to produce rather more realistic versions of `primacy' or `non-primacy' in the urban size distributions for individual countries. It turns out there were European 14 countries for which this could be done (sadly excluding the U.K.). They were Austria, Belgium, Croatia, Spain, France, Germany, Hungary, Ireland, Italy, Netherlands, Portugal, Romania, Slovakia, and Switzerland. Following the more conventional form of estimation of the RSR, with the log(rank) as the dependent variable, and powers (square and cube) of the log metropolitan population as explanatory variables, we have: The conventional estimations of the RSR have assumed c2 and c3 to be zero. We carried out estimations of the simple linear, the linear and square term, and the full cubic form, for all 14 countries. Results are given in Table 1, with the Durban-Watson statistic. The latter is more normally used in time-series econometrics, but we wished to make use of it to study certain properties of the residuals (below section X). We also note in Table 1 the number of observations on metropolitan areas for each country, and the minimum population size for that country. The collection of data on metropolitan area population was clearly arduous and time consuming for the GEOPOLIS team (and was not completed for Europe). Some of the countries, notably Austria, and the still more rural countries of Ireland and Slovakia had distributions going down to 10,000, but the size distribution for Spain goes down only to 80,000 and those for France and Germany to 50,000. For the bigger countries in the sample, the lower tail of the size distribution was neglected, no doubt for time and resource reasons. For the simple linear estimates of the RSR the most interesting outcome is whether the indications are of a (linear) primate (i.e. big city - dominated) distribution. Let us examine how many of the coefficients of LMPOP in the linear form are significantly (at 99%) different from one. In the form of the specification we have used primacy would be indicated by the absolute value of the coefficient b1 of LMPOP less than one, and anti-primacy (or middle-domination for want of a better name) by a value more than one. Focusing just on the coefficients that are 99% significantly different from one, we find 5 primate and 2 anti-primate (middle-dominated) countries. Let us also discuss the interpretation of the square and cubic terms, for the specifications where they are included. Figures 1 and 2 show versions of primacy in the urban size distribution that could be termed primacy `of the second order' and `of the third order'. Primacy `of the second order' means that the specification with the square term has the coefficient c2 positive Primacy `of the third order' is indicated by d3 > 0 in the estimation of An examination of the OLS results in Table 1 shows the following, in terms of the signs of firstly c2 and then d3, summarised in Table 2. We see that the urban size distributions for the 14 countries come out primate (that is a positive coefficient c2 by 10 to 1 in the second order estimations, and 6 to 4 in the third order estimations (that is a positive d3). The 6 countries with primacy `of the third order' using d3 in the cubic equation are Spain, France, Hungary, Netherlands, Romania, Slovakia. The 4 `anti- primate' (middle-dominated) countries with significantly negative d3 come out as Belgium, Germany, Italy, Portugal. It is notable that Belgium and Portugal came out in the simple linear run as primate (i.e. the opposite to the cubic) but with a very low Durbin Watson statistic, suggesting a weak specification and clusters of positive and negative errors. With the cubic equation, the D-W statistic is higher (closer to 2), indicating weaker clustering of residuals, but only for Romania does it (nearly) suggest no significant clustering at all. It is tempting to take a little further the concept of `primacy of the third order’. One possible extra step is to use the cubic estimation form, and compute what the slope is `at the top of the size distribution’, that is when log(MPOP) takes its maximum value for that particular distribution. A straightforward differentiation of the cubic form gives: and if we use the estimates of the d-coefficients, and the maximum value of LMPOP for that distribution, we readily arrive at the slope. The example shown in Fig. 2 above shows the cubic form with a slope well below one at the right hand intercept, which could be interpreted as a new form of primacy `at the top of the size distribution’. We are not then limited by the simplest rank-size log-linear function which constrains the log-slope to be constant and uses the slope below one as the indicator of primacy. Out of the 14 countries, we ignored 3 countries for which we found that the forecast slopes `at the top of the distribution’ came out positive (these were Hungary, Netherlands and Romania). For 3 other countries, the cubic coefficient d3 was insignificant (these were Austria, Ireland, Switzerland), and it seemed appropriate to use the square functional form to compute a slope estimate. One of these (Ireland) produced a positive estimated slope. The suggestion from Table 3 is that the most primate distributions `at the top end’ are to be found in France and Spain, and the least primate are in Germany and Switzerland. It is interesting that of the most mature and well-developed European economies, Germany and Switzerland have the strongest system of regional governance. Belgium could also be mentioned in connection with strong regional autonomy, and Italy has its long history of city- states and battle for national identity and independence in the 19th century. Italian colleagues also often stress that the economic capital (Milan) and the political capital (Rome) are in many ways rivals, and indeed almost symbolise the two `old’ Italies. In contrast, Austria and France are often mentioned with reference to extreme primacy in urban size distributions, and even Spain, despite its two leading cities of very similar size, has a striking lack of regional cities of substantial size. We find it useful to fit a curvilinear relationship to the size distribution, and to draw primacy conclusions for a particular point of the distribution, namely the top. We could equally well examine other sections of the distribution. We have used the GEOPOLIS data base of urban sizes for 14 European countries to compute for the year 2000 estimates of the Zipf law, including the traditional linear specification and square and cubic terms. The latter allow us to generate measures of primacy in the metropolitan size distribution that may vary down the Log(Rank) / Log (population) curve, unlike the traditional linear estimation of the rank-size rule. We find quite a broad spread of primate and `anti-primate’ (or middle-dominated) distributions, with federal governance systems or recent national unity and independence being associated with an anti-primate distribution. There are two principal weaknesses of the data set. Firstly, all of the urban area definitions are based on physical separation using satellite photography. Many would consider that a set of metropolitan areas defined as physical built-up areas, but without any reference to function (including commuting flows) was unsatisfactory. Secondly, resource constraints in the GEOPOLIS project meant that not all European countries were included; and of those that were, the truncation size at the lower end of the distribution varied. Smaller countries (e.g. Ireland) had their size distribution detailed down to a size 10,000, whereas larger countries (e.g. Spain and Italy) had a truncation at population 80,000. This affected the findings using non-linear functional forms, given that the detail of the `lower tail’ was lost if the truncation was at quite a big size. However, we are still able to obtain some interesting results, contrasting urban size distributions typical of unitary versus federal states in Europe. There is a Europe-wide data set of urban areas for those over 200,000 population, which was discussed at an earlier RSA conference (Crampton (2003)), this has the weakness of completely omitting the smaller end of all the distribution. The current paper (although it gets no closer to a full Europe-wide urban size hierarchy down to a small size) focuses on gaining some insights from what the GEOPOLIS project gave us. We have not in this paper made any use of the time series of (fixed boundary) sizes going back to 1950. That raises a different range of issues over using fixed-boundary metropolitan areas back into time periods when the urban area definition may be less appropriate. Finally, since the author is U.K. based, a comparable set of U.K. urban areas using the same GEOPOLIS definitions would be interesting, though labour-intensive to generate. 