Over the past two decades, many studies have attempted to test the empirical validity of Zipf ’s law in different regions and countries. By using various methods for estimating the Pareto exponent (Gabaix and Ioannides, 2004; Gabaix and Ibragimov, 2006; Dimou and Schaffar, 2007), these studies have allowed the comparison of different urban landscapes and have either confirmed or contradicted Zipf ’s law (Moriconi-Ebrard, 1993; Guérin-Pace, 1995; Glaeser et al., 1995; Krugman, 1996; Eaton and Eckstein, 1997; Fujita et al., 1999; Dobkins and Ioannides, 2000; Cuberes, 2004; Anderson and Ge, 2005; Soo, 2005; Ye, 2006). However, when focusing on the shifts in urban hierarchies over time, a more dynamic approach is required, with regard to both the nature and causes of city growth (Black and Henderson, 2003; Gabaix and Ioannides, 2004; Bosker et al., 2006). 
By using empirical evidence based on Balkan peninsula data for the period 1981–2001, this paper studies the dynamic patterns of urban hierarchies within a particularly unstable demographic, institutional and political region, mainly due to the collapse of communist regimes and the splitting-up of the former Yugoslavia. Over this period, the peoples of the Balkans saw their national frontiers redrawn, as a result of conflicts generated by ethnocentric impulses, leading to vast migrations both within the region and out of it. Among these migrations were the movements of 300 000 people from Bulgaria to Turkey in the 1980s, 200 000 people between Serbia and Croatia during the Serb–Croat war of 1991, 1 300 000 between the various republics in the former Yugoslavia during the Bosnian war (1992–95), 180 000 between Serbia and Macedonia in 1995 and over 400 000 between Albania and Greece in the 1990s (Economou and Petrakos, 1999; Petrakos and Totev, 2001; Venderburie, 2005; Domenach et al., 2005). In addition to these internal movements, there was an exodus from the Balkan region, with over 2 million people leaving over the past 20 years, mainly for western Europe (Hovy, 2005). In the long-term, these migrations have resulted in contrasting demographic trends in the Balkan peninsula with, initially, an increase of its population, from 50.610 million in 1981 to 53.687 million in 1991, followed by a decrease to 49.676 million in 2001 (World Bank, 2006).
Taking these changes into account leads one to a certain number of questions, when studying the evolution of the Balkan peninsula’s urban hierarchies. Firstly, how did the Balkan city-size distribution vary over the period studied? Did it follow Zipf’s law or not? Secondly, is the growth of Balkan cities a random or a deterministic process, sensitive to city-size effects? In the former case, heavy political upheaval should lead to permanent changes in city-size distribution, while in the latter case, these events may have temporary effects on the distribution but size remains the fundamental explanatory factor for city growth. 
The main hypothesis of this paper is that city size does matter when it comes to city growth dynamics, but not in such a critical way as predicted by some recent theories. The consequences of temporary random shocks on Balkan urban growth, due to political, social and institutional unrest, are different according to the size of the cities. Medium-sized cities have resisted these shocks better than some large conglomerations, which have suffered from demographic volatility. 
The paper is organised as follows. Sections 2 and 3 investigate the theoretical aspects by presenting first random growth and then endogenous urban growth theories which link city dynamics to size. Section 4 treats the methodology and data specification for the Balkan region. Section 5 gives information on the time variations of the Pareto exponent for the Balkan city-size distribution. Section 6 investigates urban growth and focuses on the shifts in the Balkans’ urban hierarchies, using tests for non-stationarity in city size and Markov transition matrices. The last section concludes. 
Random growth theories consider that city growth is a stochastic process which, in the steady state, produces, for large cities, a rank–size distribution that obeys Zipf ’s law. These theories follow Gabaix’s (1999) basic model, developed under the very restrictive hypotheses of a growing population, free labour mobility—although only for young people— and constant returns to scale technologies. 
The growth of cities appears to be a random walk process, linked to randomly distributed exogenous shocks, which generate urban amenities in a multiplicative way. These amenity shocks are either policy shocks (related to the level of taxes, to pollution, to the quality of public and municipal services and infrastructure such as roads and schools, or to environment protection measures) or natural and historical shocks (due to natural catastrophes, wars, diseases or poor harvests in less developed economies), but Gabaix also considers the possibility of industry-specific productivity shocks in bigger cities. All these amenity shocks subsequently modify a city’s household utility function. 
If ait is the level of amenities for city i, a household whose consumption level is c, has a utility function u(c) of the form 
If the levels of amenities ait are independent and identically distributed and if the wage in city i is wit, then, in equilibrium, all utility adjusted wages will be the same for all cities 
Then, considering the probabilityoof death and that only young people migrate, once in their life, the growth of city is 
with the normalised size of city i in period t 
As the distributions of amenity levels ait are independent of the initial size Sit, the city growth variables are also independent across city sizes, with a distribution f . This means that each city i has the same expected demographic growth rate. 
The average normalised size is constant which requires that 
If G is the tail distribution of city sizes at time t, the equation of motion for G, in the steady state, is 
Gabaix (1999) argues that a distribution such as satisfies this equation, provided Zipf’s law holds. This means that, beyond a certain size threshold, city growth dynamics obey Gibrat’s law and produce a Pareto rank–size distribution of cities. Cordoba (2006 and 2008) extends Gabaix’s approach, by arguing that when Zipf’s law holds, not only the growth rates of cities but also their variance are independent of size (Gabaix and Ioannides, 2004; Cordoba, 2008). 
In order to test the random growth hypothesis, Ioannides and Overman (2003) produced a non-parametric estimation of urban growth, by using a sample of large metropolitan areas in the US from 1900 to 1990. They found that the growth process of US cities obeys Gibrat’s law and hence scale effects play no determining role in city growth dynamics. Following Ioannides and Overman’s work, Rossi-Hansberg and Wright (2007) also introduced a model able to predict random urban growth. Under some particularly restrictive conditions, such as the elimination of physical and human capital, they considered that city-size growth depends upon randomly distributed productivity shocks, specific to a localised industrial sector or group of firms. In their model, the expected urban growth rate and variance still remain independent of the size of cities, which confirms Gibrat’s law. However, Rossi-Hansberg and Wright (2007) admit that this does not necessarily result in Zipf’s law, because of the short-term effects of the exogenous productivity shocks which may, on the contrary, lead to deviations from a Pareto distribution. 
At the opposite end of the spectrum, a number of empirical studies have sought to test Gibrat’s law on time-series data for cities of different sizes. Working on theoretical issues previously raised by Bessey (2002), Garmestani et al. (2005) found evidence for significant clustering and discontinuity in city-size distribution on a regional scale in the US between 1890 and 1990, which contra- dicts the hypothesis of Zipf ’s law. By plotting the normalised city sizes versus their long- term growth rates, Garmestani et al. (2007) revealed departures from Gibrat’s law, with smaller towns growing significantly faster than larger ones. 
When dealing with conflict-affected distributions, Davis and Weinstein (2002) supposed that each city undergoes, in a permanent but random process, isolated shocks which result in a relocation of labour. This produces a temporal instability in the slope of the distribution of city sizes. Davis and Weinstein studied the case of a country which experienced the most powerful shocks to city-size evolution during the 20th century—namely, Japan which suffered the Allied bombing of its cities during World War II. They found that these bombings had significant but temporary effects and that, after about 15 years, the Japanese cities returned to their initial, pre-war positions in the national rank–size distribution. This seriously contradicts the random growth model predictions. 
Bosker et al. (2006) initially reached a somewhat different conclusion, because they found that the ‘memory’ effects of the Allied bombings on the demographic dynamics of German cities were much longer than claimed by Davis and Weinstein. They showed that the smaller cities, which were relatively unaffected by the bombings, have significantly and permanently moved to a higher position within the rank–size distribution of German cities since the war. Sharma (2003) reached an almost identical conclusion when studying the effects of the shock of the 1947 partition of India and Pakistan, with respect not only to the cities’ sizes but also to the cities’ relative growth during the 20th century. However, unit root tests on the growth of each city’s size from 1925 to 1990, led both Bosker et al. and Sharma to reject Gibrat’s law in 75 per cent and 87 per cent of the cases for, respectively, the German and Indian samples. 
The endogenous urban growth theories are principally based on Henderson’s models (Black and Henderson, 1999 and 2003; Henderson, 2004; Henderson and Wang, 2007). Quite unlike the theories mentioned earlier, those of endogenous urban growth assume that cities’ differing sizes depend on firms’ location choices, when comparing the advantages and drawbacks of each city. Firms concentrate geographically in order to take advantage of conglomeration effects, linked either to specialisation (MAR externalities) or to diversification (Jacob externalities), but suffer, on the other hand, from diseconomies due to congestion and the costs of commuting. 
Following this theoretical framework, Eaton and Eckstein (1997) and Black and Henderson (1999, 2003) developed models in which the size of a city depends on parameters such as scale externalities and human capital concentration. Using Barro and Sala-i-Martin’s model, Eaton and Eckstein have studied the dynamics of French (1876–1990) and Japanese (1925–85) city-size distribution during the 20th century. Although they worked on small samples (which included the 40 largest metropolitan areas), they developed Markov transition matrices, showing that the k largest cities in each country maintained their ranking over the entire reference period, which means that city growth is parallel, rather than convergent or divergent. 
Black and Henderson (1999) developed a Lucas model, in which urban size is a function of the conglomeration effects due to the presence of human capital externalities and localised information spillovers. They assumed a closed urban system, with two types of cities, no appearance of new cities and free movement of households for whom the migratory choices depend on the stock of human capital in each city. Black and Henderson considered that urban growth is exclusively linked to the growth in human capital in each city. 
If IIis the weighted elasticity of the size of a city as a function of its human capital (between the cities of types 1 and 2), then 
where, is the ratio of human capital per worker between cities 1 and 2; and are the levels of the scale economies in each type of city, linked to the total volume of localised information exchange; and  1 and a2 are the elasticity rates of the sizes of cities 1 and 2 to their respective stocks of human capital. 
Black and Henderson (1999) considered that there are two possible steady states. In the first one, the ratio of human capital per worker between a city of type 1 and one of type 2 remains constant over time. In the steady state, the adjustment to specific isolated shocks within a sector or even a group of individual firms is almost spontaneous and the cities experience parallel growth given by 
where, n1 and n2 are the growth rates of cities of types 1 and 2; is the anticipated rate of future household growth; is the elasticity of substitution between products;and is the constant growth rate of the human capital. 
Black and Henderson extended this approach to allow new cities to enter the system. The entry rate of new cities of types 1 and 2 also depends on the growth rate of the human capital, given by 
where, m1 and m2 are the numbers of new cities; and g is the country’s demographic growth rate. 
One can easily show that urban growth is equal to the national demographic growth minus the rate at which new cities appear 
In the steady state, cities differ by their ratio of human capital per worker and by their size, while featuring the same growth rate in human capital and therefore in their populations. The number of cities increases only if g. 
In the second case (II< 1), Black and Henderson considered that the human capital converges towards a stationary level and, as a result, the cities also converge to an optimal size. In the steady state, urban growth is fuelled solely by new cities entering the system. 
By using this model, Black and Henderson (1999) test the nature of urban growth, while including the heterogeneity of cities through differentiated stocks of human capital. In an initial work on the evolution of the distribution of US cities between 1900 and 1990, the two authors found that the average size of the cities increased under the impetus of technological changes and human capital accumulation, but also that the smaller cities grew faster than the large ones, hence leading to a convergence of urban dynamics towards an optimal city size. However, by relaxing some hypotheses, in particular the strong relationship between urban growth and the role of education, to which the growth in human capital was almost exclusively linked, Black and Henderson (2003) found, in a more recent work, that US cities exhibited parallel growth patterns over the same period. 
Some authors have tested the existence of parallel urban growth by using sample data from other countries. Sharma (2003), Bosker et al. (2006), Delgado and Godinho (2007) and Dimou et al. (2008) all reject the hypothesis of parallel growth for cities, in the urban systems of India, Germany, Portugal and China respectively. 
This paper tests urban growth patterns in one of Europe’s most agitated regions, which features a complex urban landscape, characterised by continuous political reconstruction and vast migratory movements. We therefore consider the Balkan peninsula to be a single global urban system rather than the sum of different national or regional urban sub-systems. When it comes to data collection, however, some problems occur, since the definition of a city varies through space and time. 
Cheshire (1999) considers three criteria for sampling: the number of cities, the size of cities and a conglomeration threshold above which the sample represents a fixed proportion of the country’s population. The first criterion presents some problems because, in small countries, a city of rank n might be simply a village, whereas in a bigger country, it could be a substantial conglomeration. The third criterion is also worrisome because it is strongly biased by the degree of urbanisation in each country. Lastly, the second criterion has the disadvantage of introducing samples of differing sizes for countries. Nevertheless, this seems realistic because large countries generally have a greater number of cities than small ones. 
In our sample, we retained all cities with over 20 000 inhabitants, which is one of the lowest city-size thresholds used in rank–size studies. City data series go from 1981 to 2001, which broadly represents the period before, during and after the crisis in the former Yugoslavia and the collapse of the communist regimes, hence allowing one to measure their effects on the Balkan urban hierarchies. Data were principally provided by the World Gazetteer database and completed, for some missing years, by data from the national statistical offices. This means that for Bosnia, Croatia and the Yugoslavian Republic of Macedonia, Serbia and Slovenia, the data are regional from 1981 to 1991 and national afterwards. For Greece, a grouping of communes into urban units was carried out in 1993. A set of suburban communes in the two biggest metropolitan areas, Athens and Thessalonica, was included in this grouping during the census of 2001. To make the data homogeneous and comparable, we have therefore also pooled the data from 1981 to 1991 to agree with the presentation used in this country after 1993. Finally, the European part of Turkey was not included in this study, as Istanbul mainly attracts internal migration from the eastern part of the country and features different demographic and sociological characteristics which would have skewed the rank–size distribution of cities throughout the whole Balkan peninsula. 
As a result, the nine regions/countries selected are relatively homogeneous from a demographic point of view (the biggest, Romania, has 21 million inhabitants, while the smallest, Slovenia has barely 2 million). (See Figure 1.) One can easily see in Table 1 how contrasting demographic changes, during the 1981–2001 period, have influenced our sample. Among the 316 cities of over 20 000 inhabitants in our 2001 sample, 16 are in Albania, 21 in Bosnia, 42 in Bulgaria, 23 in Croatia, 20 in Macedonia, 38 in Greece, 82 in Romania, 16 in Slovenia and 58 in Serbia. 
From a methodological point of view, we have performed two complementary analyses. First, we focused on the evolution of the rank–size distribution of the cities, between 1981 and 2001, through the study of the time variations of the Pareto exponent. We used the Gabaix and Ibragimov (2006) correction, which eliminates the bias in ordinary least squares regression when applied to small finite samples, as is the case here. This involves replacing the traditional rank–size model with the rank–1⁄2 model 
with the approximate true standard error of the estimated coefficient given by (Kratz and Resnick, 1996; Gabaix and Ibragimov, 2006; Dimou and Schaffar, 2007). 
In order to have complementary information on the distribution patterns, we also used Rosen and Resnick’s (1980) quadratic model, where a value significantly different from 0 indicates a departure from a Pareto distribution Secondly, we investigated urban growth patterns. Initially, we tested for stationarity in city size. We considered that a city’s sizes are generally correlated over time, because of the durability of the publically owned equipment, houses and real estate investments. If is the logarithm of the population of a city i at time t, then the size of a city is a first-order autocorrelation process such as 
Where,  is the first-order regression coefficient; and eit an isolated shock at time t. 
This means that an isolated shock, leading to a single migration process, should have significant and durable effects on a city’s demographics, as advocated by the random growth theories. In order to test the longevity of the effects of such a shock on a city’s population, we performed a unit root test (Sharma, 2003; Chen and Fu, 2007). 
In the work discussed next, we have highlighted the relative growth of cities by studying the changes that occur in the distribution patterns of the city sizes. We have used a Markov transition matrix, which is a convenient method to model fluidity and to examine substantial intradistribution mobility (Black and Henderson, 2003). 
Urbanisation in the Balkans increased during the 1981–2001 period: from 45.2 per cent of the population in 1981, the urban population increased to 55.5 per cent in 1991 and 59.7 per cent in 2001, while, at the same time, the total population of the peninsula declined because of war and migration, mainly during the second decade (Table 2). This means that the urbanisation process was a genuine phenomenon between 1981 and 1991, but only a statistical one between 1991 and 2001, mainly due to a decrease in total population. This is underlined by the fact that the average city size increased by 10 per cent during the first decade, but stagnated and even decreased between the 1991 peak (98 658 inhabitants) and 2001 (93 916 inhabitants). 
Table 3 shows the evolution in the rank–size distribution of the cities between 1981 and 2001, by estimating the values of the Pareto exponent for the three reference periods. One can note some significant features. First, the Pareto exponent was significantly higher than 1 over the whole period, which means that the Balkan peninsula is a rather polycentric region; this seems a normal result, as the capitals of each country are distinct economic and political centres. In Table 4, one can see that, among the 10 biggest cities in the peninsula in 2001, eight are capitals. 
Secondly, the Pareto exponent decreases monotonically from 1981 to 1991, which 
means that the Balkan city-size distribution tends to become more hierarchical. This is probably due to the progressive collapse of communist regimes which led to more relaxed policies towards migration and resulted in higher urbanisation and demographic concentration in big cities. However, under the shocks of war, institutional breaking-up and insecurity, this progression stopped and the Pareto exponent stagnated during the 1991–2001 period, as people seemed to stay in medium-sized cities more than in larger conglomerations. 
Thirdly, the observed distributions do not follow Zipf ’s law for any year of the reference period. This is also confirmed by the significantly positive value of the quadratic termein Rosen and Resnick’s model, the results of which are given in Table 5. 
Finally, when comparing the density kernels of 1981, 1991 and 2001, one recalls the un- balanced and contrasting patterns of the Balkan peninsula’s urban hierarchies during this period (Figure 2). The 1991 curve exhibits a lower apex and a wider base than that of 1981, which supports the idea that urban growth leads to a more unbalanced rank–size distribution of cities. However, the 2001 plot shows a slight return towards the previous situation, which can be explained by a stop in migratory movements and stronger demographics in medium-sized cities, as mentioned earlier. 
In order to test urban growth patterns, we first performed a unit root test. The augmented Dickey–Fuller test (ADF) for examining the instability of the size of a city i takes the form 
where, 
We consider two hypotheses: H0 : 
is the instability hypothesis, where cities’ sizes are not stationary, versus the alternative, where the logarithms of cities’ sizes converge to a constant value in the steady state. Following Chen and Fu (2007) and Dimou et al. (2008), we used a specification where the constant and the linear term account for the upward trend and kj is the number of the lagged difference term for city i 
We carried out the ADF test for 112 cities, for which we had complete time-series between 1981 and 2001. Among them, 87 had significant unit roots at the 10 per cent level, which led us to reject stability in 77 per cent of the cases. It was the same for the whole urban population of the peninsula (–1.015). Table 6 provides additional information for some cities. 
The results of the ADF test strongly reject H0 and show that most cities’ sizes in the Balkan peninsula are not stationary. Sharma (2003) and Bosker et al. (2006) have pointed out, however, the weakness of the unit root test as a diagnostic aid, when applied to a single equation for a short time-series. Although unit root tests on samples with large N can improve a model’s diagnostic capacity, as in our case, we have used the Im et al. (2003) panel method, which includes cities that do not reject unit roots, to improve the power of our unit root tests. 
The Im et al. test value confirms the previous results as the hypothesis of non-stationarity cannot be rejected at the 10 per cent level. This means that cities do not converge towards a unique steady size and therefore we cannot confidently reject the random growth hypothesis. However, even if city sizes evolve in a non-stationary way, common factors that affect city growth may still have a different impact, according to size. We have studied relative urban growth and intradistribution mobility 
in the Balkan cities during the 1981–2001 period, to test such a hypothesis. 
We proceeded by dividing the relative size distribution of the cities into five discrete groups, at the date t, with cut-off points defined exogenously with the following bounds (see Table 7) 
between the threshold entry point of our sample and where is the average city size; 
between and; between and the average city size; betweenband 2; and greater than twice the average city size. 
The slight differences between the definition of these cut-off points and the ones most often used in regional studies literature (Eaton and Eckstein, 1997; Dobkins and Ioannides, 2000; Bosker et al, 2006) are due to the specificity of the Balkan city-size distribution and to the choice of our sample’s threshold. 
Let f be the vector of distributional shares for each group. By assuming that this distribution follows a homogeneous first-order stationary Markov process, f evolves over time according to 
where, M is the transition matrix of existing cities from time t to t+1. Each element mij of the transition matrix corresponds to the probability that a city goes from group i at moment t to group j at moment t+1. Each mij is estimated by the maximum likelihood method 
where, n is the number of cities moving from group i at moment t to group j at moment t+1 and nit the number of cities in group i in year t. Standard errors are given by 
Following Bosker et al. (2006), we have estimated, for the Balkan city-size distribution, the 10-year transition matrix from 1981 to 1991, which corresponds to a period of moderation in the communist regimes’ constraints on migration and to a gradual opening-up to a market economy, prior to war and political unrest. Results are given in Table 8. 
The transition matrix illustrates the trend of the Balkan urban hierarchies during this period: in almost all the categories, cities moved up a category, with the exception of the last one but this is a limitation in the explanatory power of the matrix, as it is upper bounded. Institutional reforms and economic changes have clearly positive effects on urbanisation. Although we previously rejected stationarity in city size, medium-sized cities grew faster than the bigger ones, during this 10-year period. 
Next, we turn to the period of the former Yugoslavia’s crisis and failing communist system in order to study their impact on the distributional patterns of city size. Table 9 presents the transition matrix for the 1991–2001 period. First of all, one can note that the diagonal probabilities have much higher values than in the preceding period. This means that temporary shocks due to war, ethnic tensions and massive migratory movements did not produce instability in the city-size distribution, but had an opposite effect, which is a rather unexpected result. However, the descending off-diagonal transition probability patterns exceeded the ascending patterns of the previous decade, which is mostly due to the overall decrease in population in the peninsula. 
More importantly, the diagonal probabilities for the medium city-size categories are higher than for larger ones. This means that stability is higher—and demographic upheaval lower—for small and medium-sized cities than for larger conglomerations, more affected by external shocks due to war and institutional and political change. Once again, size seems determinant in explaining different cities’ demographics, but no simplistic conclusion can be drawn (such as parallel or convergent growth). 
When looking at the whole period, the Markov matrices show that the city-size distribution in the Balkans displays no tendency to completely flatten (spread) or to converge (collapse to a common city size). Nevertheless, different city-size categories feature specific growth trends, which means that size does matter when characterising urban growth. This means that the intradistribution mobility of cities follows different trends, according to the period and size category. Medium-sized cities grew faster during the 1980s and resisted external shocks during the 1990s better than large conglomerations. 
One of the limitations of a study such as this is that a 20-year period is very short for measuring the effects of external shocks on the city-size distribution. Moreover, political and institutional upheaval in the Balkans is not finished—although it is only currently occurring in some specific provinces, such as Kosovo—which means that we can observe short-term effects for long-term institutional, demographic and political disturbances. 
Although this reduces the robustness of the interpretation, it does not prevent us from delivering some interesting conclusions about urban dynamics within conflict-affected city-size distributions. Recent papers on this issue all admit that short-term results should be handled with care, but they also provide evidence that the information provided relating to short-term and long-term trends may be different and complementary for city demographic analysis. 
This paper’s findings can be summarised as follows. The Balkan city-size distribution does not obey Zipf ’s law, over the whole period of our study. The Pareto coefficient follows a variable trend, declining from 1981 to 1991, then stagnating. Cities’ relative growth rates and intradistribution mobility show that city growth dynamics follow a ‘hybrid’ pattern, where city size filters the effects of common external shocks. City-size dynamics thus seem more complex than predicted by random growth or endogenous growth theories. Finally, during the 1981–2001 period, medium-sized cities’ demographics resisted external shocks due to conflicts, redrawing of national frontiers and institutional upheaval better than large conglomerations. This does not, however, lead to convergence towards a steady city size. 

