The purpose of this study is to trace and interpret the changing geographical pattern and city-size distribution of the world's largest urban centers, from 1900 to 1980. Fundamentally, we assume that national urban systems are components of a global urban system. From this perspective, urban centers are agglomerations of economic activity, jobs, and population within a global economic order. 
Major world cities can be regarded as interrelated by virtue of a world-scale division of labor. The idea of an integrated worldwide division of labor can be traced to Smith (1974) and Marx (1967), and has been developed in the twentieth century in radical as well as mainstream economics (Checkland, 1982). Examples of diverse frameworks that have emphasized the global economy include dependency theories (for example, Amin, 1974; Frank, 1967), economic cycle theories (Schumpeter, 1939; Vernon, 
1966; 1979), and world systems theories (Bornschier and Chase-Dunn, 1985; Hopkins and Wallerstein, 1980; Olson, 1982; Rostow, 1978; Wallerstein, 1974; 1979; 1980). Research emphasis on a global urban system, however, has emerged only recently (see Cohen, 1981; Friedmann and Wolff, 1982; Meyer, 1986b; Scott, 1985; Timberlake, 1985; Trachte and Ross, 1985; Walton, 1976). This growing body of literature involves a merging or intersection of research on systems of cities (Bourne and Simmons, 1978; Conzen, 1977; Simmons, 1981), ecological theory (Hawley, 1950; Lincoln, 1979; Wanner, 1977), and the international division of labour. 
Our concern is with the rather dramatic changes in the geography and distribution of the world's urban system in the twentieth century. London, which governed an empire spanning one fifth of the world's land area and one fourth of the world's population, was the world's largest city in 1900 (Gregory et al, 1910, page 351). Eighty years later, the political map of the world showed over one hundred and sixty independent sovereignties, many of which were newly self-governing and newly industrializing in the wake of two global wars. The world's largest urban center in 1980 was Mexico City, the population of which grew from less than half a million to over fourteen million during the preceding eight decades. Whereas in 1900 there were barely a dozen urban settlements in the world with populations over one million, by 1980 there were nearly two hundred 'millionaire' cities.
The application of city-size distribution analysis at world scale is unconventional, although Zipf (1949) and more recently Chase-Dunn (1985) have addressed population-rank relationships among world urban centers above certain size levels. More commonly, city-size distribution analyses have focused on subsets of cities which constitute an independent urban system of less than global extent. Relatively infrequently used procedures to establish system closure include bounding on the basis of financial flow data (Berry, 1966), or on the basis of ecological criteria, especially in premodern contexts (Adams, 1965; Alden, 1979; Skinner, 1977). By far the most common approach to closure has been to regard national boundaries as indicative of city-system boundaries (see, for example, Berry, 1961; Berry and Kasarda, 1977; Rosing, 1966). Demarcation along national borders offers the attraction of avoiding ambiguities created by differences in census procedures between countries. However, national boundaries are neither entirely stable nor impermeable to interaction and exchange—processes of clear relevance to the structure and integration of urban centers. True independence or system closure for national subsets of cities is questionable. We concur, for example, with Smith (1982, page 54) who noted that findings of urban primacy may result from misspecification of "the relevant urban system". 
In addition to the issue of delimiting urban systems, a second demarcative problem exists with respect to bounding individual cities. Asami (1986, page 39) has suggested that in a large system of cities rank-size relationships, as determined from population values, are similar both for legal cities and for unmeasured natural cities, on the condition that legal cities are consistently smaller or larger than natural cities for all urban centers. Although many urban centres statistically defined as cities do tend to be underbounded, there are, of course, exceptions (Vining, 1986, page 5). Difficulties of cross-national investigation are compounded by the fact
that different countries collect population census data on different intervals and at different dates. Thus, although it must be conceded that the data compiled for this study fall short of theoretical perfection, they do nevertheless permit tentative conclusions to be drawn at a global scale. 
Between 1900 and 1980 the spatial distribution of the world's one hundred largest cities changed from one of concentration in northwestern Europe to one of global dispersion. This deconcentration of world urban centers has occurred in the context of changing positions of individual cities. 
At the beginning of this century, over half of the world's largest cities were located in Europe [figure 1(a) and table 1, see over]. Of these, fifteen were located in the British Isles, the hearth of the industrial revolution. Many other major cities were located in continental northwestern Europe, where industrialization as an impetus to urban development took hold only slightly later than in Britain. Southern and eastern Europe were less highly urbanized, but these subregions also held significant numbers of the world's one hundred largest cities. Eastern North America, another early entrant in the industrial era, held nearly as many of the top one hundred cities as all of Asia, including China, India, and Japan. Few major cities were found in either Africa or Latin America in 1900. 
By 1940, on the eve of the Second World War, eight of the world's one hundred largest cities were located in Latin America, and more than a quarter were located in Asia [figure 1(b) and table 1]. Yet, the North Sea zone still held the most conspicuous concentration of such cities. Europe, including the Soviet Union, still held the dominant share of the one hundred largest cities in the world. Together, North America and Europe still contained over sixty percent of the world's largest cities. On the whole, the distribution of the largest cities in 1940 was quite similar to the distribution in 1900. 
Between 1940 and 1980, however, the geographical distribution changed substantially [figure 1(c) and table 1]. The North Sea concentration, which previously had been highly conspicuous, was greatly attenuated. North America held a larger proportion of the world's top one hundred cities than did all of Europe, including Russia. The largest proportionate gains, however, were in the Third World. Between 1900 and 1980 the overall proportion of the world's top one hundred cities in Latin America, Asia, and Africa doubled, from twenty-eight to fifty-five percent. In 1980 over one third of the world's top one hundred cities were in Asia, including four in Japan, seven in China, and seven in India. In Latin America, the number of such cities rose from six in 1900 to thirteen in 1980. 
Whereas in 1900, Europe and North America held nearly three fourths of the world's one hundred largest cities, eight decades later over half of such cities were located outside these regions. London, the largest city in the world in 1900, fell to sixteenth rank by 1980; Mexico City rose from sixtieth to first rank between 1900 and 1980. On average, the fifteen largest cities in 1900 fell over twenty-seven rank positions during the subsequent eighty years. Correspondingly, the fifteen largest cities in 1980 had risen an average of thirty-one rank positions between 1900 and 1980. We raise the question as to how these dramatic changes in individual rank positions and in overall geographical pattern influenced the city-size distribution of the world's major urban centers between 1900 and 1980. 
Traditionally, changes in urban population sizes and ranks have been analyzed in terms of a rank-size rule sequence of where Pl is the population of the largest city and n is the last rank in a given subset of cities (Zipf, 1941; 1949). Chase-Dunn (1985) has argued that this sequence has increasingly overstated the rate of size diminution among major urban centers in the twentieth century, as the global city-size distribution has become more convex, a concept elaborated upon below. However, Chase-Dunn's research focused upon only the world's ten largest urban centers and involved the use of a primacy index whose properties have not yet been thoroughly examined. We follow a more sensitive research procedure using a general mathematical form of the rank-size relationship indicated by equation (1) (see also Malecki, 1975; 1980; Sheppard, 1982):
where r is rank of city, -q is empirical coefficient (slope), P, is population size of the largest city, and Pr is population size of the rth ranked city.
The utility of equation (1) is that the coefficient, -q, allows one to capture partially the differing degrees of relative concentration and dispersion of population among the centers of an urban system. This coefficient becomes an exponent in the antilogarithmic equivalent of equation (1). If concentration dominates, then q will be greater than unity. Conversely, if dispersion dominates, then q will be less than unity. Or, if tendencies toward concentration and dispersion are more balanced, then q will be exactly unity, and the simple rank-size rule sequence of will be obtained. The logarithmic equation permits the simple estimation of the slope (q) and the intercept (P,) of a least-squares regression line. A measure of goodness-of-fit is also provided by the least-squares analysis. However, as population size and size-rank are conceptually interdependent, and because all cities over a given size, rather than a sample of such cities, are included in the analysis, conventional tests for determining statistical significance are not appropriate (Johnston, 1978, pages 15). 
We fitted the population data for the world's one hundred largest urban centers in 1900, 1940, and 1980 to the rank-size model, using simple least-squares regression. We found a high degree of correlation between the populations in these cities and their size-ranks (table 2). A nearly perfect linear logarithmic relationship was thus indicated. The intercept terms for the estimated equations (P, in table 2) increased dramatically from 5.9 million in 1900 to 26.5 million in 1980, reflecting an overall increase in the sizes of cities as well as an increase in the proportion of the world's population residing in urban areas. Pertinently, the estimated slope coefficients \-q in table 2) changed from -0.693 in 1900 to -0.599 in 1980, indicating that urban population growth in the twentieth century became more characteristic of smaller than of larger centers. As Malecki (1975; see also Singer, 1936; Davies, 1972) has demonstrated, if the slope coefficient estimated for a given urban system remains unchanged over time, then the rate of population change has been relatively uniform across urban size-rankings. A n increase in the slope coefficient shows that, in general, larger places have grown faster than smaller places, whereas a decrease in the slope coefficient shows that, in general, smaller places have grown faster than larger places. 
Malecki (1975; 1980) also found that the magnitude of the slope coefficient is partly dependent upon the threshold population size. This threshold is used to determine which cities are included in a rank-size analysis. In the cases of urban subsystems in North Dakota and the US Midwest as a whole, Malecki found that the higher the size threshold for inclusion, the steeper the slope and the greater the apparent concentration of urban population within larger centers. As Malecki's findings pertained to urban subsystems, we raised the question as to whether a positive relationship between threshold size and population concentration would be obtained if a more comprehensive, worldwide conception of an urban system were adopted. We investigated this question, first, by employing a fixed minimum population threshold of one million persons, and, second, by examining only the world's fifteen largest cities for each year. 
The analysis of data for all millionaire cities in the world (table 2) involved the inclusion of an increasing number of cities for each year, from 13 in 190, to 40 in 1940, and finally to 190 in 1980. One finding was that the level of variance (R), as determined by a least-squares analysis of these data, remained roughly constant between 1900 and 1980 (0.978 in 1900, 0.990 in 1940, and 0.977 in 1980), suggesting that a linear logarithmic rank-size relationship has described relatively accurately the distribution of population sizes among these cities since the turn of the century. The estimated intercepts increased from 5.8 million in 1900, to12.9 million in 1940, and to 29.6 million  in 1980. More noteworthy is the change in the slope coefficient from -0.683 in 1900 to -0.715 in 1940, and to -0.634 in 1980. The change to a steeper slope in 1940, and to a shallower slope in 1980, suggests that during the period 1900 to 1940 there was a slight tendency for urban population to concentrate in larger millionaire cities and that this was followed by a tendency toward greater dispersal after 1940. 
In the analysis of only the fifteen largest urban centers in 1900, 1940, and 1980 (table 2), the level of explained variance was again essentially constant over the three time periods (0.981 in 1900, 0.979 in 1940, and 0.981 in 1980). For 1940, the estimated intercepts of the least-squares regression lines were greater in the analyses of the millionaire cities and of the top fifteen cities than for the top one hundred cities. This reinforces the impression of an increasing concentration of 
urban population in the larger urban centers during the early twentieth century. For 1980, however, the intercepts for the top one hundred and millionaire cities were much larger compared with the intercept for the top fifteen cities. This suggests pronounced differences between the very largest and the smaller urban centers. The estimated slope coefficient changed slightly from —0.684 in 1900 to —0.702 in 1940, before changing sharply to —0.245 in 1980, indicating an extremely shallow slope. As in the case of the analysis of the millionaire cities, this analysis of the fifteen largest cities in 1900, 1940, and 1980 revealed a negative relationship between threshold population size and population concentration after 1940. 
Whereas analysis of the urban subsystems of North Dakota and the US Midwest (Malecki, 1975; 1980) showed increased population concentration as city-size thresholds were increased, the world system of cities after 1940 showed increased dispersion as city-size thresholds were increased. The different results are intelligible in terms of the different demographic processes associated with the two scales. Whereas North Dakota and the US Midwest experienced outmigration from small urban centers in the twentieth century, the rate of growth of moderately sized urban centers in the world system of cities increased rapidly in the twentieth century, particularly after the Second World War. This situation resulted as former colonial territories assumed the status of nation-states entering an industrialization period characterized by declining mortality and high population growth rates. Concurrently, rates of population growth in industrialized Western countries declined. Furthermore in the latter half of the twentieth century international labor mobility became restricted as world political divisions multiplied. During this period the net effect has been a world city-size distribution reflecting 1) great population growth in Third World cities that were small or medium-sized in the first half of the twentieth century, and 2) a declining percentage of the world's urban population in the top fifteen world cities, by comparison with an increasing proportion in the top one hundred world cities. 
Graphs of the relationships between city size and city rank for the world's one hundred largest cities in 1900, 1940, and 1980 (figure 2) show, first, that the world city-size distribution essentially conformed to a linear rank-size pattern in 1900 and 1940, although on average the positions of the very largest urban centers fell slightly below the least-squares regression line in 1900 and slightly above the line in 1940; and, second, that the 1980 rank-size distribution exhibited convexity for the very largest urban places. Our stance is that a concave rank-size distribution represents high concentration of economic activity, and concomitantly, a disproportionately high concentration of population in a single center or in a few centers (primacy); a linear rank-size distribution represents a dispersion of economic activity and of population among cities that are systematically graduated in size; and a convex distribution reflects dispersed concentrations of economic activity and of population among a number of particularly large centers. 
The transition from a slightly fluctuating but essentially linear rank-size distribution in the first half of the twentieth century to a convex distribution in the latter part of the twentieth century corroborates the statistical results of the regression analyses, indicating increasing population dispersal among the very largest centers after 1940. Our interpretation of convexity places emphasis on factors different from those emphasized in other studies. In particular, Johnson (1980) interpreted convexity to be related to the problems of scale of analysis in premodern contexts, whereas Chase-Dunn (1985) interpreted the mid-twentieth-century trend towards convexity to reflect a multicentric world system characterized by a decline of global political hegemony. In the following section we examine these interpretations and discuss the importance of neglected demographic considerations in the interpretation of city-size distributions. 
Convex city-size distributions have been interpreted by Johnson (1980, page 241) as reflecting situations in which "either the scale of analysis is sufficiently large as to incorporate multiple 'independent' settlement systems (pooling) or sufficiently small as to exclude the primate center of a single settlement system (partitioning)". 
As the settlement system under investigation is that of the world as a whole 'partitioning', or the exclusion of the system's dominant center, can be eliminated as an explanation for the convex pattern in 1980. 'Pooling', on the other hand, may be considered relevant, given the global scale of our analysis. However, the concept of pooling begs the question as to why convexity emerged only after World War 2 rather than sooner. 
Using a primacy index to examine city-size distributions for the world's ten largest cities at various points in time from 800 AD onward, Chase-Dunn (1985) suggested that the dissolution of British economic and political hegemony was succeeded by the development of a convex, multicentric world system, with rival world cities competing for power and central place functions. According to Chase-Dunn, a multicentric convex pattern reflects an unstable world urban system that is vulnerable to economic, political, and perhaps to military rivalries among competing macroregions. 
Multicentricity need not, however, imply low integration in a world system comprising competing semi-independent settlement systems, the nodal points of which are the world's largest cities. By virtually any standard (for example, world trade as measured by imports and exports, international telecommunications, currency exchanges, and so forth) the volume of international interurban interaction has increased significantly, particularly after World War 2 when the world urban system began to exhibit convexity. Such convexity may be interpreted in terms of dispersed concentrations of economic activities and urban populations around the world. But dispersed concentrations of economic activities need not imply dispersed concentrations of economic and political power. The assumption that urban population-size distributions reflect concentration or dispersion of economic and political power underlies Chase-Dunn's interpretation of postwar convexity, as well as the traditional conceptualization of city-size distributions (for example, Lasuen et al, 1967; Vapnarsky, 1969; Zipf, 1941; 1949). However, the relationship between development, or dependency, and city-size distribution has been found to be tenuous both empirically and conceptually (Ettlinger, 1981; 1984; Frey et al, 1986; Lagopoulos, 1971; Mehta, 1964; Sheppard, 1982). We suggest that the dispersed concentrations of urban populations in the latter part of the twentieth century is most fully intelligible in terms of demographic considerations, a neglected area of research in the context of city-size distribution analysis. 
Since World War 2, rural to urban migration has accelerated in less-developed countries as a result of surplus labor in rural areas and of consequent job search in urban areas. Indeed, present rates of rural to urban migration in less-developed countries are far greater than at any time in developed countries (Birdsall, 1984; Vining, 1986). Rapid growth in rural to urban migration, coupled with relatively high fertility and declining mortality rates in Third World urban areas (Kahnert, 1986), produces increasingly large numbers of job seekers unable to be absorbed by formal economic sectors (Portes and Benton, 1984). Urban growth, in such cases, is more related to problems of social welfare and to impoverished socioeconomic conditions than to an increased economic or political 'dominance' of urban centers. Thus, although in certain contexts connections may exist between urban growth and concentration of political and economic power, processes associated with selective urban expansion are not uniform globally. 
The contemporary global convex city-size distribution is a direct product of disproportionate population growth among major Third World cities, coupled with relative population stability among high-order centers in developed countries. In these high-order centers declining natural population growth as well as metropolitan to nonmetropolitan migration (Berry, 1978) have been experienced. Particularly in the latter part of the twentieth century, as economic activity has decentralized at national as well as at international scales, urban population growth may be unrelated to increased centralization of political or economic power in urban centers (Meyer, 1986a). Although selective urban growth can occur in association with technological change and increasing competitive leverage (Borchert, 1972; Conzen, 1977), this may be uncharacteristic of the contemporary world urban system as a whole, which is affected by the deconcentration of low-order economic activity and continued centralization of managerial control (Cohen, 1981; Frobel et al, 1980). 
The question remains as to why convexity did not occur sooner, perhaps in association with Western colonialism. One of the most notable features of the period following World War 2 has been the formation of numerous politically independent nation-states throughout the less-developed world. In association with this rather dramatic change in the world political system, capital mobility increased through an expansion of multinational and transnational corporate linkages connecting spatially segmented pools of labor (Clark, 1981; Hamilton and Linge, 1981). One effect of expanding nationalism was the imposition of greater restraints on international labor mobility. After World War 2, immigration laws in the United States, for example, favored dependents over primary wage earners and effected a shift in immigrant sex ratios from male to female-dominated (Arritt, 1986). Similarly, by 1974 virtually every advanced European country had taken measures to curtail immigration from less-developed countries (Brookes, 1986, page 27). 
Although an international migration of professional workers has resulted in a 'brain drain' of more skilled and educated workers from many less-developed countries, the overall percentage of population that has migrated from less-developed to developed countries is quite small. In fact, one element that distinguishes less-developed countries from developed countries, at corresponding levels of industrialization, is the relative absence of an external frontier among the former (Birdsall, 1984). Whereas population pressure in Western Europe during the latter part of the nineteenth century was partly alleviated by the emigration of millions of Europeans around the world, contemporary rapid population increase in less-developed countries in the latter half of the twentieth century has resulted in growing concentrations of people in regional and national growth centers—the 'end of the line' in the absence of an external frontier. This circumstance challenges the mechanistic view that urban decentralization necessarily occurs as an 'optimum' city size is reached (Wheaton and Shishido, 1981). 
The convex world city-size distribution that emerged in the latter part of the twentieth century reflected two trends. First, the world system became more integrated in economic terms as capital became increasingly mobile. Second, the world urban system experienced a segmentation of labor markets which were divided by national boundaries, as international labor mobility became more restricted. Hence, in 1980 convexity resulted principally from differential growth rates among cities of an economically integrated but politically and demographically partitioned world urban system. 
Our interpretation of changes in the world's urban system emphasizes demographic considerations. International and intranational migrations, as well as relative natural population growth rates, are integrally related to economic processes (especially those of investment and disinvestment) and to the concomitant movements of people associated with the changing geography of jobs. Economic or political explanations which ignore demographic processes in the analysis of city-size distributions tend to assume that population size is necessarily positively correlated with economic and/or political power. Although this situation may hold in some cases, at specific points in time, the investigation of changing urban size and of changing city-size distributions must account for processes that may vary from one context to another (Johnston, 1977). 

