The last four decades have witnessed rapid expansion of the study of heavy-tailedness phenomena in economics and finance. Following the pioneering work by Mandelbrot (1960, 1963) (see also Fama 1965 and the papers in Mandelbrot 1997), numerous studies have documented that time series encountered in many fields in economics and finance are typically thick-tailed and can be well approximated using distributions with tails exhibiting the power law decline 
with a tail index (see the discussion in Cizek, Hardle, and Weron 2005; Rachev, Menn, and Fabozzi 2005; Gabaix 2009; Ibragimov 2009, and references therein). Here means that as. Through-out the paper, C denotes a positive constant, not necessarily the same from one place to another. Let 
be decreasingly ordered observations from a population satisfying power law (1.1). Despite the availability of more sophisticated methods (see, among others, the reviews in Embrechts, Klüppelberg, and Mikosch 1997; Beirlant et al. 2004), a popular way to estimate the Pareto exponent is still to run the following OLS log-log rank-size regression with: 
or, in other words, calling t the rank of an observation, and Z  its size: here and throughout the paper, log stands for the natural logarithm]. With N denoting the total number of observations, regression (1.3) with is motivated by the approximate linear relationships implied by the empirical analogues of relations (1.1). The reason for the popularity of the OLS approach to tail index estimation is arguably the simplicity and robustness of this method. In various frameworks, the log-log rank-size regressions of form (1.3) in the case and closely related procedures were employed, among other works, in Rosen and Resnick (1980), Alperovich (1989), Krugman (1996), Eaton and Eckstein (1997), Brakman et al. (1999), Dobkins and Ioannides (2000), Davis and Weinstein (2002), Levy (2003), Levy and Levy (2003), Helpman, Melitz, and Yeaple (2004), Soo (2005), and Klass et al. (2006). Further examples and the discussion of the OLS approach to the tail index estimation are provided in Persky (1992), Gabaix et al. (2003, 2009), Eeckhout (2004), Gabaix and Ioannides (2004), and Rossi-Hansberg and Wright (2007). 
Let denote the usual OLS estimator of the tail index using regression (1.3) with and let denote the OLS estimator of in general regression (1.3). 
It is known that the OLS estimator in the usual regression (1.3) with is consistent for. However, the standard OLS procedure has an important bias. This paper shows that the bias is optimally reduced (up to leading order terms) by using. Therefore, we recommend that, when using a log-log regression, one should always use rather than. 
We further show that the standard error of the OLS estimator of the tail index in general regression (1.3) is asymptotically. The OLS standard errors in log-log rank-size regressions (1.3) considerably underestimate the true standard deviation of the OLS tail index estimator. Consequently, taking the OLS estimates of the standard errors at the face value will lead one to reject the true numerical value of the tail index too often. 
The 1/2 shift actually comes from more systematic results, in Theorems 1 and 2, which show that it is optimal and further demonstrate that the following asymptotic expansions hold for the general OLS estimator:
[here and throughout the paper, for and stands for a normal random variable with mean and variance. We conclude that, when estimating the tail index with an OLS regression, one should always use the regression with the standard error of the OLS estimator bn of the slope given by 
We further provide similar asymptotic expansions for the tail index estimator in the dual to (1.3) regression, with logarithms of ordered sizes regressed on logarithms of shifted ranks. As follows from Theorems 1 and 2, the approaches to the tail index inference using regressions (1.3) and (1.4) are equivalent in terms of the small sample biases and standard errors of the estimators. The paper also discusses asymptotic expansions in the analogues of regressions (1.3) and (1.4) with the logarithms of shifted ranks replaced by harmonic numbers (Section 3). 
Numerical results indicate that the proposed tail index estimation procedures perform well for heavy-tailed dependent processes exhibiting deviations from power law distributions (1.1) (see Section 4). They further demonstrate the advantage of the new approaches over the standard OLS log-log rank-size regressions (1.3) and (1.4) with.
The tail index estimation methods proposed in the paper are illustrated using an empirical analysis of Zipf’s power law for the United States city size distribution (Section 5). 
In recent years, several studies have focused on the analysis of asymptotic normality of the OLS tail index estimators in regressions (1.4) with and logarithms of ordered observations regressed on logarithms of ranks (see, among other works, the review in chapter 4 in Beirlant et al. 2004). Such an approach to estimation of the tail shape parameters was introduced by Kratz and Resnick (1996) who refer to it as QQ-estimator. Nishiyama, Osada, and Sato (2008) discuss asymptotic normality of the OLS tail index estimator in the regression of on. Schultze and Steinebach (1999) consider closely related problems of least-squares approaches to estimation for data with exponential tails (see also Aban and Meerschaert 2004, who discuss efficient OLS estimation of parameters in shifted and scaled exponential models). Kratz and Resnick (1996) establish consistency and asymptotic normality of the QQ-estimator in the case of populations with regularly varying tails. Their results demonstrate that in the case of populations in the domain of attraction of power law (1.1), the standard error of the QQ-estimator of the inverse of the tail index based on n largest observations is asymptotically. Csorgo and Viharos (1997) prove asymptotic normality of the OLS estimators of the tail index in the case γ = 0 (see also Viharos 1999; Csorgo and Viharos 2006). Beirlant et al. (1999) and Aban and Meerschaert (2004) indicate the possibility of modification of the QQ-estimator in which logarithms of ordered observations are regressed on. Aban and Meerschaert (2004) mention in a remark without providing a proof that regressing logarithms of observations from a heavy-tailed population on logarithms of their ranks shifted by 1/2 reduces the bias of the QQ-estimator. Their remark seems to be motivated by simulations, not by the systematic understanding that Theorems 1 and 2 provide; in particular, they do not indicate that a shift of 1/2 is the best shift. 
To our knowledge, general regressions (1.3) and (1.4) with and asymptotic expansions for them are considered, for the first time, in the present work. The modifications of the OLS log-log rank-size regressions with the optimal shift and the correct standard errors provided in this paper were subsequently used in the works by Hinloopen and van Marrewijk (2006), Bosker et al. (2007), and Gabaix and Landier (2008). 
Throughout the paper, for variables stands for the sample mean. As usual, for a sequence of and a sequence of positive constants a we write if the sequence is bounded in probability (resp., bounded a.s.) and write.
Let be the order statistics for a sample from the population with the distribution satisfying the power law 
Denote and. Let us consider the OLS estimator of the slope parameter b in log-log rank-size regression (1.3) with and logarithms of ordered observations regressed on logarithms of shifted ranks: 
We will also consider the OLS estimator of slope in dual to (1.3) regression (1.4) with logarithms of ordered sizes regressed on logarithms of shifted ranks: 
The following theorems provide the main results of the paper. 
Theorem 1. For any, the following asymptotic expansions hold for the bias of the estimators and:
Theorem 2. For any, the following asymptotic expansions hold for the estimators and: 
The arguments for Theorems 1 and 2 are presented in the Appendix. 
Remark 1. As follows from asymptotic expansions (2.4) and (2.5), the small sample biases of the OLS estimators and in regressions (1.3) and (1.4) involving logarithms of shifted ranks are both minimized under the choice of the shift. 
The proof of Theorems 1 and 2 is based on the following results and methods. First, it exploits the Rényi representation theorem to relate the order statistics for observations following power law (1.1) to the partial sums of scaled iid exponential r.v.’s (see the beginning of the proof of Lemma 6). Then, we use martingale approximations to the bilinear forms that appear in the numerators of the statistics and [relation (A.38) in the proof of Lemma 6 and relation (A.57) in the proof of Lemma 8]. Third, the arguments use strong approximations to partial sums of independent r.v.’s provided by Lemma 1. 
For, denote by H  the tth harmonic number. Further, let. Consider the analogues of regressions (1.3) and (1.4) that involve logarithms of ordered sizes y and the functions of ranks of observations: 
Similar to the proof of Theorem 2, one can show that the following asymptotic expansions hold for the tail index estimators and using regressions (3.1) and (3.2): 
Comparison of expansions (3.3) and (3.4) with (2.4)–(2.7) shows that, ceteris paribus, tail index estimation using regressions involving harmonic numbers is to be preferred, in terms of the small sample bias, to that based on the logarithms of shifted ranks for any. On the other hand, regressions (1.3) and (1.4) are simpler to implement and more visual than estimation procedures based on (3.3) and (3.4). In particular, we are not aware of works that employed estimation approaches based on harmonic numbers similar to (3.3) and (3.4), while regressions (1.3) and (1.4) with are commonly used, as discussed in the Introduction. Comparison of the asymptotic expansions for the tail index estimators using regressions (3.1) and (3.2) with the OLS tail parameter estimators in log-log rank-size regressions (1.3) and (1.4) also sheds light on the main driving force behind the small sample bias improvements using logarithms of shifted ranks. This driving force is, essentially, the fact that provides better approximation to the harmonic numbers than does and, more generally, than. This is because, as follows from the inequalities for in Havil (2003, section 9.3, pp. 75–79), for all, 
as where is Euler’s constant, so the optimal choice of the shift γ in the sense of the best asymptotical approximation is 1/2 [note that the last inequality on p. 76 in Havil 2003, should read, in the notations of this section.
In this section, we present simulation results on the performance of the traditional regression (1.3) with and the modified regression (1.3) with the optimal shift and the correct standard errors given by Theorem 2. We present the numerical results for the OLS Pareto exponent estimation procedures under dependence and under deviations from power laws (1.1). The results are provided for dependent heavy-tailed data that follow AR(1) processes, or MA(1) processes, with. The departures from power laws are modeled using the innovations ut that have Student t distributions with the number of degree of freedom (Tables 2 and 4) or distributions exhibiting second-order deviations from Pareto tails in the Hall (1982) form 
(Tables 1 and 3). The choice of the number of degrees of freedom for Student t distributions is motivated by the recent empirical works on heavy-tailedness that indicate that, for many economic and financial time series, the tail index lies in the interval (2,4) (see Loretan and Phillips 1994; Gabaix et al. 2003, 2009). The benchmark case in (4.1) corresponds to the exact Pareto distributions (2.1), and the values and model observations Zt. Similar to deviations of γ from 1/2 in (2.4) and (2.5), the term modeling the departures from the power laws in (4.1) creates a bias in the estimators and in regressions (1.3) and (1.4). 
Tables 1 and 2 present the simulation results for the traditional OLS estimator b of the tail index using regression (1.3) with. These tables also provide the comparisons of the OLS standard errors of the estimator with its true standard deviation. Tables 3 and 4 present the numerical results on the performance of the OLS estimator b using modified regression (1.3) with. In Tables 3 and 4, we also present the standard errors of b with provided by expansion (2.6) and compare them to the true standard deviation of the estimator. The asterics in Tables 1–4 indicate rejection of the true null hypothesis on the tail index in favor of the alternative hypothesis at the 5% significance level using the reported standard errors for innovations that follow distributions (4.1) with considered in Tables 1 and 3 and for innovations that have Student t distributions with degrees of freedom in Tables 2 and 4]. 
For instance, consider the class of exact Pareto observations, which is the first row in Tables 1 and 3, with n = 50 extreme observations included in estimation. Table 1 (column n = 50, the first row) shows that the traditional OLS estimator using regression (1.3) with yields an average of 0.924 (whereas the true tail index is 1), and the OLS standard error is 0.024, very far from the true standard deviation, 0.185. By contrast, the OLS estimator using regression (1.3) with proposed in this paper (Table 3, column n = 50, the first row) and expansion (2.6) yield an average estimate of 1.011, and the standard error of 0.202, very close to the true standard deviation, 0.199. 
More generally, the OLS estimates b of Pareto exponents using traditional regression (1.3) with γ = 0 reported in Tables 1 and 2 are significantly different from the true tail indices, which means that b is biased in small samples. According to the same tables, the OLS standard errors in regression (1.3) with γ = 0 are consistently smaller than the true standard deviations. In most of the numerical results presented in Tables 1 and 2, the true null hypothesis on the tail index is rejected in favor of the alternative hypothesis at the 5% significance level using the OLS standard errors. 
In most of the entries in Tables 3 and 4, including dependence and deviations from power tail distributions, the standard errors in the regression with shifts are much closer to the true standard deviations than in the case of the OLS standard errors reported in Tables 1 and 2. Comparing to the traditional regression in Tables 1 and 2, the approach illustrated by Tables 3 and 4 rejects the true null hypothesis on the tail index significantly less often. 
Additional simulation results show that regression (1.3) with also performs well and dominates the choice γ = 0 for GARCH processes. At the same time, it performs very similar to (3.1) and thus may be preferable due to simplicity. 
As an example, we study the distribution of city populations (see also Gabaix and Landier 2008, where the estimation procedures proposed in this paper are used to to confirm a Zipf’s law for market capitalization of large firms). This example is, historically, the first economic example of Zipf’s law (Zipf 1949), which is the name of power law (1.1) with the tail exponent equal to 1. Zipf’s law is a regularity that has been exerting an enduring interest, because it appears to describe such diverse phenomena as the frequency of words, the popularity of Internet sites, the magnitude of earthquakes (see Li 2003), and the size of firms (see Axtell 2001; Gabaix and Landier 2008). 
As a U.S. example of a study of Zipf’s law for the cities (in the upper tail at least, see Eeckhout 2004), we take, following Krugman (1996) and Gabaix (1999), all 135 American metropolitan areas listed in the Statistical Abstract of the United States in the year 1991, which includes all agglomerations with size above 250,000 inhabitants. The advantage is that “metropolitan area” represents the agglomeration of the cities (e.g., the metropolitan area of Boston includes Cambridge), 
which is commonly viewed as the correct economic definition. We rank cities from largest (rank 1) to smallest (rank n = 135), and denote their sizes.
Regression (1.3) with estimated for the data is 
The number in the bracket is the standard error for the tail index (the slope coefficient b ) given by by Theorem 2. 
Figure 1 shows the corresponding plot. To plot the corresponding log-log graph of the counter-cumulative distribution function vs log x we recommend to plot on the x axis, and on the y axis, rather than the more usua. 
Regression (1.4) with estimated for the data is 
producing the estimate of the tail index equal to with the standard error given by by theorem 2. The estimates of the tail index are not statistically different from 1 at the 10% significance level, so that Zipf’s law for cities is confirmed in this dataset. 
The OLS log-log rank-size regression and related procedures are some of the most popular approaches to Pareto exponent estimation, with b taken as an estimate of the tail index. Unfortunately, these procedures are strongly biased in small samples. We provide a simple approach to bias reduction based on the modified log-log rank-size regression. The shift of 1/2 is optimal and reduces the bias to a leading order. We further show that the standard error on the Pareto exponent in this regression is asymptotically, and obtain similar results for the regression. The proposed estimation procedures are illustrated using an empirical analysis of the U.S. city size distribution. Simulation results indicate that the proposed tail index estimation procedures perform well under dependence and deviations from power law distributions. They further demonstrate the advantage of the new methods over the standard OLS log-log rank-size regressions.
An important open problem concerns asymptotic expansions for the OLS tail index estimators and their biases for dependent processes, including the autocorrelated time series considered in simulations. Combining the modified OLS estimation approach with block-bootstrap and GARCH filters may be useful in developing tail index estimation procedures under dependence. In addition, unreported preliminary results suggest that the OLS approaches to tail index estimation are more robust than Hill’s estimator of a tail index under deviations from power laws. Other important problems include the analysis of the optimal choice of the number n of extreme observations used in estimation and the study of the asymptotic bias of the OLS estimators when n is determined by minimizing the asymptotic mean square error. Analysis of these issues and comparisons of the OLS tail index estimators with other procedures are left for further research. 

