Dozens of studies during the past decades have addressed the salient rank–size rule for city sizes known as Zipf’s law. As is well known, Zipf’s law states that the upper tail of the city size distribution within an area (say, the USA) and at any point in time can be described by a Pareto distribution with shape parameter equal to -1. This implies a unique rank–size relationship according to which the area’s largest city (New York) is approximately twice as large as the second largest city (Los Angeles), three times as large as the third largest city (Chicago) and so on. Virtually, all existing studies are concerned with the city size distribution of entire countries, however. The starting point of our article is the observation that Zipf’s law for city sizes can also hold in single regions of a country. 
Figure 1 illustrates this observation with an example from Germany. We provide a standard Zipf plot for the 20 largest cities from one German Federal State only, the State of Hessen. More precisely, we plot the log of the city’s rank in Hessen’s urban hierarchy (#1 for Frankfurt, #2 for Wiesbaden, #3 for Kassel and so on) against log city size measured by the number of inhabitants in the year 1997. When running a standard Zipf regression of the type we estimate with standard error 0.325 and R2 = 0.99. Consistent with Zipf’s law, we find that the rank– size relationship in log scales can be approximated very accurately by a linear curve. Secondly, the slope of this linear curve is very close to 􏰅1, which is also what Zipf’s law suggests. As shown below, that picture looks similar for other German regions, including Germany as a whole. 
The main aim of this article is to shed light on the question ‘why’ Zipf’s law tends to hold on a regional level. The contribution by Gabaix (1999) is central to us in this respect. In proposition 1 of that paper Gabaix proves that if cities grow stochastically with the same expected growth rate and same variance (a property that is known as ‘Gibrat’s law’), and if one introduces an additional small friction by imposing a lower bound for city sizes, then a steady-state city size distribution is implied that obeys Zipf’s law. In other words, Gabaix establishes a version of Gibrat’s law as a statistical explanation for Zipf’s law, thereby opening new avenues for theoretical and empirical research on the rank–size rule. Theoretical papers on the economic microfoundations of Zipf’s law often aim at theories about Gibrat’s law or generalized versions thereof (see e.g. Rossi-Hansberg and Wright, 2007; Eaton and Eckstein, 1997). On the empirical side, Gabaix’s proposition 1 is the basis for the influential study by Ioannides and Overman (2003), who test Zipf’s law indirectly by investigating if Gibrat’s law holds at the national level in the USA. 
An even more important insight for our purpose is proposition 2 of Gabaix (1999). There he shows that if a country is composed of several regions, and if Gibrat’s law holds in each of those regions, then Zipf’s law is satisfied for all regional and also for the national city size distribution. This theoretical insight has never been addressed empirically. In this article we provide a first country-wide test of Gibrat’s law from a regional perspective. 
Except for the fact that a ‘region’ is a subset of the ‘country’, there is nothing specific in Gabaix’s theory as to what characterizes a ‘region’. In our empirical analysis, we therefore contemplate three different concepts. Most naturally, we analyse the German Federal States (Lander), which can be thought of as well-defined clubs of cities that are both spatially adjacent and that share an important administrative commonality. Secondly, we analyse ‘random regions’, i.e. random draws from the population of large German cities, where the resulting samples of cities need not be adjacent to one another. Thirdly, we build spatial clubs of cities that are geographically adjacent, but that need not belong to the same Federal State. Like the La ̈ nder, these spatial clubs represent ‘non-random’ samples from the population of large German cities, yet they do not coincide with administrative borders. 
It turns out that Gibrat’s law not only holds at the national level in Germany, but also it tends to hold in almost ‘each’ region regardless of which type (Federal State, random region and spatial club). What does this finding imply? First, it suggests that urban growth among large cities is scale independent in Germany, and this property prevails not only in the aggregate or in random draws, but also in non-random samples of cities. This is consistent with theories of proportional urban growth (such as Eaton and Eckstein, 1997), where all cities regardless of initial size and location within the country grow with the same rate. 
Secondly, according to Gabaix (1999), Zipf’s law should then also be valid within the various types of regions and in the country — and in fact, this appears to be true. These findings thus empirically confirm the theory on the close correspondence of random city growth at the regional and the Zipfian rank–size rule at the regional and the national level. This does not mean, however, that Zipf’s law holds by definition for every possible combination of cities. If all cities grow with the same expected rate, then the national urban system converges to a steady-state distribution, which satisfies Zipf at the national level. Zipf’s and Gibrat’s law also hold in ‘random’ and certain economically meaningful ‘non-random’ samples of cities. But we show that it is still possible to deliberately construct groups of cities such that Zipf’s and/or Gibrat’s law breaks down. 
Gibrat’s law states that all cities, regardless of initial size, grow randomly with the same expected rate and same variance. Gabaix (1999) shows that under certain conditions this growth process converges to a Pareto distribution with exponent equal to -1: Zipf’s law. This requires some additional frictions, since the pure form of Gibrat’s law generates a log-normal city size distribution, not the Pareto (see Eeckhout, 2004). This is not to say, however, that a proportionate growth process plus ‘something else’ cannot give rise to the Pareto distribution, and in fact Gabaix (1999) considers ‘something else’: a lower bound on city sizes. The idea is that cities follow a growth process of the type 
is the percentage change of population size in city i at time period t. reflects the expected growth in normalized sizes: where is the normalized growth rate for cities with size S, is the mean growth rate, 􏳖 is the variance of city growth rates and Bit is a Brownian motion. 
The lower bound Smin is introduced by considering a reflected geometric Brownian motion, which specifies that a city which is larger than Smin will follow the process as given in (2.1), whereas a city with St will follow where the parameter is a negative drift. In other words, a city that has ‘walked’ below the threshold Smin is not able to become smaller or to disappear. Gabaix (1999) proves that this process converges to the counter cumulative distribution function where S is the normalized city size, a S is the normalized size of the largest city (rank 1), and where the exponent is given by 
with S denoting the mean city size. Thus, in the limit as Smin goes to zero an exponent is implied. For values, the exponent would not be equal to one. This case would not be Zipf’s law exactly, but a closely related form of a power law distribution (see Brakman et al., 1999 on this distinction). 
Now, consider a country that is composed of R regions. The Gibrat growth process specified above holds within each region, thus describes the regional city size distribution, where as Smin goes to zero. The national city size distribution is then characterized by (see proposition 2 in Gabaix, 1999): 
and again. In words, if Gibrat’s law and hence Zipf’s law holds within each region, then Zipf’s law also holds for the country. This is true in the case when all cities (across all regions) have the same expected growth rate, but even if regions differ in their average growth rate as long as urban growth is scale independent within each region. This theoretical result is the basis for our empirical analysis in Section 5. 
The data set for this study is provided by the German Federal Statistical Office (Statistisches Bundesamt). It contains the area size (in square kilometers) and the number of inhabitants for 2143 German cities, covering the time period from 1975 to 1997. This data is quite exhaustive and includes even very small towns. For our purpose these small towns are of little interest, however, as Zipf’s law concentrates on the upper tail of the city size distribution (Eeckhout, 2009). By truncating the data one has to define what the ‘upper tail’ precisely is. Our benchmark estimations for the national level rely on the 71 largest German cities with more than 100,000 inhabitants in 1997, which represent about 46% of the population in the data set. This is a standard definition for the cutoff that has been widely used in the literature (see Rosen and Resnick, 1980; Chesire, 1999; Soo, 2005). For the analysis at the State level, we stick to this cutoff wherever possible, but we require a minimum number of observations of N = 20 for each Federal State. This implies an effective cutoff below 100,000 inhabitants in most cases (Table 1).6 
A city is classified by the administratively defined boundaries, i.e. our data follows the ‘city proper’ concept. The alternative would be to use ‘urban agglomeration’ data, which aggregates main cities and suburban areas that often form own administrative units into metropolitan areas (MAs). Both classification types have certain advantages and disadvantages, as discussed, for example, in Cuberes (2009). One shortcoming of city proper data is that administrative boundaries are sometimes arbitrary and lack economic content. Unfortunately, the Federal Statistical Office does not provide consistent MA data for a sufficiently long time period to analyse urban growth at this level. We therefore have to stick to city proper data, but in Section 4 we do consider MA data for the cross-sectional analysis of Zipf’s law for a single year. 
There are two further data issues that we have to deal with. First, Eastern Germany appears in the data only from 1990 onwards. For our analysis of growth rates we have therefore focused on the former Western German cities, including only former West Berlin. For the analysis of Zipf’s law at the national level, which is for the year 1997, we have however considered the entire city of Berlin (Germany’s largest city). Secondly, over the time period 1975–1997 there have been some other reclassifications of city boundaries or city mergers. These changes led to some unreasonable jumps of area or population, but none of those affected the large German cities on which we concentrate in this article. 
Previous analyses on Gibrat’s law and Zipf’s law have usually been conducted at the national level. In this section, we first follow this typical approach and address Gibrat and Zipf for Germany as a whole, before turning to an analysis at the regional level in the next section. 
For the analysis of Gibrat’s law, we use the 71 largest German cities with population size above 100,000 inhabitants in 1997. We then follow these cities back in time until 1975 and compute 22 annual growth rates for each of those cities. Our analysis rests on ‘normalized’ city growth rates, which are constructed as follows: from the annual population growth rate of city i in year t, we subtract the mean and divide this by the standard deviation of growth, rates of the respective reference group (in this section the 71 largest German cities) in the average across all years. Under the null hypothesis of scale independent urban growth, we would thus expect that all cities, regardless of their size, have mean normalized growth rate equal to zero and variance equal to one. 
In Figure 2, we take a first look at this hypothesis and non-parametrically estimate a stochastic kernel, i.e. a 3D graphical representation of the distribution of city growth rates as a function of city size. The kernel was constructed by dividing the data into percentiles. For each one we estimate the distribution of growth rates via density smoothing. The kernel represents the distribution of growth rates conditional on size, and yields a first impression that urban growth appears to be very similarly distributed across different city size classes. 
In Figure 3a and 3b, we provide non-parametric estimates for the conditional means and variances of city growth rates. The estimation was performed using the Nadaraya– Watson (NW) technique (Nadaraya 1964; Watson 1964; Hardle 1992), which estimates the expectation of growth conditional on size. The underlying regression equation for the NW estimator is 
The unknown conditional mean and the conditional variance of growth rates, are estimated according to
In this estimation m is a locally weighted average, where the kernel Kh (in our case the Epanechnikov kernel) is the weighting function with bandwidth h. We use bandwidth h = 0.5 as our benchmark. This non-parametric test for Gibrat’s law has been previously used by Ioannides and Overman (2003). The advantage of this approach as compared with parametric regressions is its flexibility with respect to the underlying functional forms. As Hardle (1992) puts it: ‘[. . .], it does not project the observed data into a Procrustean bed of a fixed parametrization’. It thereby also does not narrow down the inference about Gibrat’s law to a single test statistic, but allows for a detailed inspection in which range of city sizes we may encounter a deviation from the null of scale-independent urban growth. 
In Figure 3a, we indicate the single observations for conditional mean growth rates by the dots, whereas in Figure 3b, we drop this scattering and only focus on the estimated conditional variance and the respective confidence band. As can be seen, the normalized mean growth rate of zero and the normalized variance of one fall inside the 99% pointwise confidence band throughout the entire range of city sizes. The confidence band for the conditional variance (Figure 3b) tends to widen at larger city sizes, which is due to the fact that there are only few observations in this range so that standard errors increase. Moreover, the NW estimator for conditional mean growth rates appears to be very slightly downward sloping in the lower range of city sizes where most of the distribution mass is concentrated. Statistically, however, we cannot formally reject Gibrat’s law for Germany. This result is consistent with Ioannides and Overman (2003) who found support for Gibrat’s law at the national level in the USA with a similar methodology. 
These findings should also be set into perspective to Bosker et al. (2008), who address the stability of the German city size distribution over the period 1925–1999. They argue that Gibrat held perfectly in Germany prior to WWII, but not in the postwar time period 1945–1999 where they found that small cities gained population relative to large ones. This would imply that the German city size distribution was permanently affected by the WWII shock. Our findings indicate that the transition from the pre- to the post-war distribution has been completed until 1975. That is, if Gibrat’s law did not hold in Germany in the first decades after the war, it seems to hold again in the more recent period. The slight negative slope in Figure 3a still seems to be consistent with Bosker et al. (2008), but we cannot reject the hypothesis that city growth is independent of city size in our sample. 
As Gibrat’s law holds at the national level in Germany, how about Zipf’s law? In Figure 4a, we plot the log of the city’s rank in Germany’s national urban hierarchy (#1 for Berlin, #2 for Hamburg, #3 for Munchen and so on) against the log of city size for the year 1997 (3.5 m for Berlin, 1.7 m for Hamburg, 1.2 m for Munchen and so on) using the city proper data. By inspection the relationship is linear with only small outliers, and in fact, linear regressions yield R2-levels beyond 0.98. For the estimation we have considered two alternative methods that both draw on the recent contribution by Gabaix and Ibragimov (2010), who show that ordinary least squares estimation yields biased results in rank–size regressions: (i) a log rank-log size regression with corrected standard errors (see legend of Figure 1 for details), (ii) a refined ordinary least squares (OLS) regression which uses the log of (rank-1/2) as the left-hand side variable (also with corrected standard errors). Under both approaches we obtain highly significant estimates for the slope coefficient. However, even though we cannot formally reject, there are deviations of the point estimates from unity. 
Recall from Section 2 that a value of different from one does in principle not conflict with the growth process specified by Gabaix (1999), provided the urban hierarchy actually follows a power law (also see Brakman et al., 1999 on this). The perfect fit of Zipf’s law is only achieved in the limit, while deviations from in empirical applications can result from small sample sizes. Furthermore, it is known from the previous literature that Zipf’s law performs better with urban agglomeration than with city proper data (see Rosen and Resnick, 1980), and the slope coefficient for Western Germany in fact moves considerably closer to when using that type of data. 
This is shown in Figure 4b where we provide an analogous Zipf plot for the 50 largest MAs in the year 1997. The very largest MAs (#1 is now the Ruhrgebiet with 5.7m inhabitants, #2 is Berlin and so on) appear to be a bit ‘too small’. Yet, the Zipf regression still yields a R2-level of about 0.97 and a highly significant slope coefficient with the first and with the second estimation approach, which are both very close to the perfect Zipf fit. In sum, we conclude that both Gibrat’s law and Zipf’s law hold at the national level in Germany. 
We now turn to the analysis of Gibrat’s law and Zipf’s law at the ‘regional’ level, which is the novel conceptual contribution of this article. 
We contemplate three different concepts of a ‘region’: (i) random regions, (ii) the German Federal States and (iii) spatial clubs of cities. For the first type of region, we ‘randomly’ draw N observations from the population of large German cities, using N = 20 as our benchmark. For each city, we compute the rank in the group’s urban hierarchy (#1 for the largest, #2 for the second largest and so on) in the year 1997 and relate the log of this rank to the log of city size. Furthermore, for each of these N cities we observe 22 annual population growth rates from 1975 to 1997, which we normalize with the mean and standard deviation of growth rates in the random region. These normalized growth rates are then used to estimate conditional mean and variance with the same methodology (the NW estimator) as before. Note that the cities within one random draw need not be spatially adjacent, and also need not belong to the same Federal State. 
Secondly, we consider the Federal States that is probably the most natural definition of a German ‘region’. The Lander are ‘non-random’ draws from the population of large German cities. Unlike the random regions they form spatially adjacent clubs of cities. Moreover, these cities share a common State administration and a common history, which in some cases is longer than the history of Germany as a nation. We therefore estimate Zipf’s law and Gibrat’s law separately for each of the eight Western German Lander, leaving out the states of Hamburg, Bremen and Berlin which are composed of a single city. 
Finally, we construct spatial clubs of cities. Our benchmark definition of a spatial club is as follows: using the 71 largest German cities, we compute for each observation the club of those cities with distance less than to the respective ‘central member’. For each club we then use the standard procedures to determine the intra-group urban hierarchy in order to estimate Zipf’s law, and to observe 22 annual growth rates for each city in order to estimate Gibrat’s law separately for each club. Note that the number of members differs across clubs, that one city can belong to more than one club, and that the respective central member does not have to be the largest city in its club. Note further that the cities within one club can belong to more than one Federal State. The 71 spatial clubs therefore do not have political or administrative content, but this definition of a region may capture the fact that larger urban agglomerations can extend across State borders (as, e.g. the Rhein-Main-area). These regions are thus also economically meaningful ‘non-random’ draws from the population of large German cities. 
For the random regions, we clearly expect Gibrat’s law to hold. Since urban growth is scale invariant in the total population of large cities, as shown in Figure 3, this property should also be satisfied (except for sampling error) in random draws from this population. This can indeed be verified. The NW estimation for single random regions yields pictures that in the vast majority look very similar as in Figure 3 (the plots are omitted for brevity). The interesting question is whether the validity of Gibrat’s law implies Zipf’s law in these random groups of cities, as Gabaix’s theory would suggest. In Figure 5a, we summarize the distribution of the OLS estimates of (with negative sign) across 500 draws of size N = 20. As can be seen, the bulk of the estimated coefficients is clustered around values between 1 and 1.1, with mean 1.09 and median 1.02. The R2 levels are consistently very high (typically beyond 0.9), suggesting that a linear function fits the data very well. Results remain robust when changing the number of cities in a random region. In Figure 5b, we show the distribution of across 500 draws of size N=100. The mean value of the estimated Zipf coefficient now becomes 1.16, whereas the median remains almost unchanged. The slightly worse fit of the exact Zipf’s law in the larger random regions is quite intuitive, as the random draws with size N = 100 now also include smaller towns among which Zipf’s law is known to perform worse (Eeckhout, 2004). The power law shape of the distribution is, however, robust across all random regions. Our findings thus support Gabaix’s theory: the validity of Gibrat’s law in the random groups of cities comes along with Pareto-distributed city sizes that are close to the Zipfian rank–size relationship. 
Turning now to the ‘German Lander’, note that the scale invariance of urban growth in the population of large German cities does not automatically imply that Gibrat’s law holds in non-random samples of this population, such as the Federal States. In principle, it is conceivable that urban growth in the Lander is not scale independent, whereas Gibrat’s law does hold in the aggregate where regional differences are averaged out. Empirically, however, this is not the case in Germany. We rather find that Gibrat’s law holds in ‘each’ Federal State. Over the entire range of city sizes that we analyse, and for all States, we cannot reject the null of zero normalized growth rates and constant variance equal to one (Figure 6), the only slight exception being the small cities in Rheinland-Pfalz. In Table 1, we summarize the results for the Zipf regressions for the Lander. The Zipf coefficients range from to (all highly significant), and we obtain R2 levels beyond 0.9 throughout. Mean and median of across the Lander are similar to the national Zipf coefficient (using city proper data) that we have reported in Section 4. Hence, we find that city size distributions on average follow a similar power law pattern in the La ̈ nder as in the national aggregate, that is for Western Germany as a whole. 
Finally, we investigate if the validity of Gibrat’s law and Zipf’s law is confined to areas within administrative State boundaries. We do this by analyzing the non-random ‘spatial clubs’ of cities. Focusing at first on Gibrat’s law, we depict the NW estimates for conditional city growth for 8 of the 71 spatial clubs in Figure 7, where one club consist of all cities with distance below d=200km around the respective central member (see Section 5.1 for the detailed description). The picture that emerges from Figure 7 is that urban growth is also scale independent in each of these non-random regions. Similar conclusions follow when we construct the spatial clubs in a different way. First, instead of imposing a fixed maximum distance d we have also assumed a spatial club to be the collection of the M = 20 large cities with the shortest distance to the respective central member. This approach balances the number of members across, but implies different geographical sizes of the clubs. Secondly, as a compromise between the two former definitions, we have drawn larger circles with d = 300 km around each of the 71 large German cities and defined a club to be the M = 20 largest cities inside that circle. We have dropped clubs with less than 20 members, which led to a total of 68 clubs. 
Regardless of how we construct the spatial clubs, we find that Gibrat’s law continues to hold. The null of scale-independent urban growth can, basically, not be rejected in any range of city sizes. In some rare cases we find that the confidence band does not cover the value of zero for the mean normalized growth rate, or the value of one for the variance. But such cases are exceptions. The typical pattern is qualitatively similar to that reported in Figure 7. Turning to the intra-club city size distributions for the latest year 1997, we again find linear rank–size relationships with R2 levels beyond 0.9. Figure 8a–c summarize the distributions of across all clubs for the three different definitions. As can be seen, the Zipf coefficients are on average similar to the national Zipf coefficient using city proper data, particularly for the second and third definition. 
The results presented in this section have shown that Gibrat’s law not only holds at the national level in Western Germany, or in random draws from the population of large cities. It is also satisfied for certain non-random samples of cities, namely the Lander and the cross-state clubs of spatially adjacent cities. How meaningful are these results? 
A first concern is that the non-parametric NW estimation may be such that Gibrat’s law can, by construction, almost never be rejected even if urban growth is actually ‘not’ scale independent. Figure 9a addresses this issue. Here, we deliberately put together some relatively small cities from Baden-Wurttemberg that exhibited long-run growth rates above the average, and some relatively large but slowly growing cities from Niedersachsen. As can be seen, the NW estimator now clearly rejects the hypothesis of scale-independent urban growth. Figure 9a thus suggests that the NW estimator is a sensible test and does not automatically support Gibrat’s law. When looking at economically meaningful samples, however, we cannot reject Gibrat’s law at the regional level. The fact that it seems to hold in almost each of the various types of regions actually suggests that all large cities have grown with the same expected rate over the period 1975–1997, i.e. that Gibrat’s law holds basically everywhere in space in Western Germany. 
Secondly, we have shown that the city size distributions in the various types of regions can be well characterized by a Zipfian power law. It is important to note, however, that this does ‘not’ imply that Zipf is satisfied by definition for every possible non-random combination of cities. That point is illustrated in Figure 9b. In the first line, we show that Zipf’s law (and Gibrat’s law) holds nicely for the 100 largest German cities (rank 1–100 in the national urban hierarchy), which is consistent with our results from Section 4.2. This is also true for the 50 largest German cities (see the second line), but Zipf clearly breaks down when considering the cities ranked 50–100 (see the third line of Figure 9b). The reason is simple. If all large German cities grow with the same expected rate over the long run, we would expect the national urban hierarchy to resemble a Pareto distribution in the upper tail. It is well known that a left-truncation does not change the power law properties of this distribution, i.e. if the 100 largest cities in Western Germany follow a Zipfian power law, so should the 50 largest cities. This is not true for a right-truncated Pareto, however, so there should be no power law for the cities ranked 50–100. Figure 9b verifies this point empirically. In other words, it is possible to construct groups of cities such that Zipf’s law does not hold, even if Gibrat’s law is satisfied. The non-random regions that we have analysed in this article are no simple left- or right truncations of the national urban hierarchy, however, but economically meaningful and spatially contiguous samples of cities. For those cases it is thus fully consistent with the theory by Gabaix (1999) that we not only find scale-independent urban growth, but also a Zipfian power law for the regional city size distributions. 
Our empirical results lead to two main conclusions. First, we have shown in this article that urban growth among large cities is scale indepedent basically ‘everywhere’ in space in Western Germany. Gibrat’s law is thus satisfied not only in the national aggregate but also in each of the various types of regions. Secondly, we have shown that city size distributions within the economically meaningful regions exhibit a strikingly linear rank–size relationship. This is consistent with Gabaix’s (1999) theoretical insight that stochastic urban growth at the regional level implies a Zipfian power law shape of the regional and the national city size distributions. 
In the literature there has constantly been scepticism about Zipf’s law. Is it really a meaningful economic relationship, or only a statistical artefact that holds almost by definition? A well-known example of this awe is the statement by Krugman (1996), who calls it ‘spooky’. We believe that our results point at an actual economic substance behind the rank-size rule. It is intimately entangled with proportionate urban growth, even on a low geographical level, but it is still possible to construct cases where the Zipfian power law breaks down despite the validity of Gibrat’s law. 
It would be interesting for future work to examine regional city size distributions and urban growth processes for further countries. How does Zipf perform on a regional level in small countries, or in regions with only few cities? Are the results for Germany representative for other developed or less-developed countries? Finally, it seems worthwhile to extend the analysis to ‘overall’ city size distributions at the regional level. In this article, we have focused on the large cities, but Zipf is a feature that pertains to the upper tail only (Eeckhout 2004, 2009; Giesen et al. 2010). Furthermore, Gibrat’s law seems to be sensitive to the inclusion of smaller towns (see Michaels et al. 2009). An extended analysis at the regional level would therefore be useful, in order to gain a better understanding of urban growth processes and urban hierarchies across all types of settlements. 
