Systems of urban settlements may be characterised in the long term by their hierarchical and spatial organisation. Despite the growth of urban population and the increase in city frequency, the evolution of French urban settlement over almost two centuries demonstrates a very important stability of the shape of the city size distribution and of its spatial distribution(Guerin-Pace, 1991, 1993). Nevertheless, over short time intervals the variation of the city population fluctuates and appears to be unpredictable from one census to another. Furthermore, the position of each city within the hierarchy is very unstable. 
In the evolution of urban systems, there exist two dynamics: a slow one which acts at the macro-level and characterises the evolution of city size distributions; and a more rapid one which acts at the micro-level of the individual city, this being the dynamic of the variation of city population over short time intervals. 
The aim of this paper is first to test, with the help of long time-series data on French cities (INED, 1984), the relability of the rank-size parameters for describing the evolution of the city size hierarchy. Then, we will show the importfiance of the sample size in the use of the rank-size distributions. Too often, the interpretations which have been profiposed in order to explain the shape of the distribution and its deviations from the rank-size rule are too hurried and do not integrate enough parameters. If we want to model the evolution of an urban settlement over a long period of time, it is necessary to understand how the two interacting dynamics of the urban system, which produce such a persistency of structure, are connected. 
We will recall very briefly, some earlier applications using a rank-size representation (see Parr, 1985). The first major empirical study is by Allen in 1954. He analysed the size distribution of cities of more than 2000 inhabitants, for 58 countries. Data covering almost two centuries were available for nine of these countries. He was the first to use data on agglomerations. Allen, like Singer (1936), avoided the important question of variation of the Pareto exponent. He only noticed the intervals within which the values vary. For this, he used Pareto’ s equations for which Allen had given an equivalent for studying the distribution of cities: 
where x is a particular population size; y is the number of cities with population greater than x; A is a constant; and a is the coefficient of Pareto. 
His conclusions are that a tends to decrease in the course of time and to move closer to unity at the end of the 19th century. This indicates an increasing tendency towards the concentration of the urban population in the largest cities, and therefore a more contrasted distribution. The values of a stabilise in the last decades of the century. Other empirical work has been carried out by Moore (1958), Simon (1968), Steindl (1968), Vining (1974), Rosen and Resnick (1980) and Pumain (1982). 
In 1985, Parr calculated Pareto’ s exponent values, and compared them in different countries at census dates when the criterion used to define the urban threshold was the same. In order to compare the values of a at different times, only data based on the `city proper’ (administrative limits) have been used. The problem is the inadequacy of the sources in providing a suitable definition of `urban’ space, particularly given the present day extent of suburban areas. 
In his study, Parr divides the countries studied into four groups: those in which the values of a fall over time (Egypt, India, Nigeria and Turkey) indicating a continuing process of concentration; those in which the values decrease and then increase slightly (Brazil, Japan, Spain and the USSR). Countries which belong to the third group (Austria, France, Sweden and the US) follow what Parr calls the “U-shaped pattern”, indicating a trend of increasing concentration followed by a marked decrease in concentration. This result is emphasised because the units used in his study are the centres of the agglomeration which have experienced a slow-down in their growth in recent decades. The length of the growth period is then underestimated and the movement of decreasing of a is thus anticipated. 
As a result of the insufficiency of empirical studies prior to 1961, the following hypothetical theory was not contradicted: the ranksize distribution worked well for the developed countries, while the underdeveloped countries produced highly contrasted city size distributions, indicating the presence of primate cities. This hypothesis came from the observations of many countries at the same time and also supposed that the city size distribution of different countries may be imagined as representing the different positions of a unique country in the course of time. 
A study of 37 countries conducted by Berry (1961) using different types of city size distribution instead of just one, concluded that “ different cities’ size distribution were in no way reliant on the respective country’s economic development”. However, the author realised that there existed a relationship between the density of population in a country, its income per inhabitant, and the form of its distribution. Thus, a highly populated country with a low income per capita may have a more contrasted city distribution than a small country with a high income per capita. For Lasuen et al. (1967), the conclusions and model of Berry are irrelevant given that Berry’ s measure of economic development is the level of income per capita, and his scale for measuring degree of rank-size is an international relative scale. However, one important contribution of Berry’ s model is the implication that size, urban age, and other entropy increasing factors have an in ̄ uence on the `initial’ degree of rank-size. 
Lasuen et al. (1967) have studied Spanish cities in order to test the relationship between city size distribution and economic growth. Their results are: if we consider the different Spanish regions at a given date (cross-time data), the revenue per inhabitant is not associated with a particular type of city size distribution. On the other hand, if we consider separately the regions for which time-series data are available, then the rank-size degree is clearly associated with the regional economic behaviour. 
For these authors, the confusion is due not only to differences in the types of data used, cross-time and time-series, but also to different scales of measurement, regional and national. Thus, the slope of the rank-size line, measured for different countries at a given date (cross-time data) is not associated with the income level of the country. Size and history of countries constitute important determinants of rank-size degree. On the other hand, rank-size degree, if measured by time-series data, is clearly associated with the income level of countries. In this case, size and history represent `initial conditions’ and ought not to be considered as variables. 
Parr has tried to compare different groups of nations, in term of a values, with the economic development of the countries. He notices that the countries which belong to the first group (increasing process of concentration) tend to have relatively low levels of development and a recent economic development: “Within a nation the value of Pareto tends to display a U-shaped trend over time, and the position occupied by an individual nation in this sequence is related to its overall level of development, and perhaps to its age”. 
He concludes that: “after the period of modern economic development has commenced, a nation appears to pass through a sequence of decreasing and then increasing values of a (U-shaped pattern); the higher the general development that a nation has attained, the further along in this sequence of a values that nation will be”. An important problem that the author underlines is the sensitivity of a country’s position in the U-shaped sequence of a values to the nature of the data employed. 
Much criticism has been made of the rank-size distribution with regard to the insufficiency of its theoretical foundations as well as the simplicity of its formulation (Christaller). The rank-size rule which corresponds to a Pareto’s exponent equal to 1 is, in reality, rarely obtained. In fact, the population of the largest city differs from the constant K, inasmuch as it is overdeveloped in relation to the rest of the urban system. Thus, it is preferable to interpret the rank-size distribution as a very general model which permits the simple description of the hierarchical organisation of a system. 
In 1972, Dziewonski expressed the view that “the rank-size distributions are a very useful tool for the analysis of settlements systems; but they do not express consistently any general rule or law pertaining to the distribution and size of settlements themselves”. 
Other criticisms rest on the possibility of comparison of the values of a between different urban systems. However, according to the urban criteria and to the population thresholds which have been used to constitute the database, we obtain different results. Thus, unless we have a set of homogeneous data, it seems unreasonable to establish comparisons between parameters which have not been calculated on the same basis. 
Our study of the French urban system finds its justification in the fact that the analysis is of a single urban system which is observed at different censuses. This therefore minimises the problems of city definition and the choice of minimal thresholds discussed earlier. 
In order to see if the rank-size model can describe the French urban system over a long time period, we have considered between 1831 and 1990, two samples of the different populations’ size thresholds. The first includes all urban units larger than 2000 inhabitants; the second, more restrictive, considers only cities with more than 10 000 inhabitants. 
Using a rank-size graph for each census date allows the analysis of the evolution of the urban hierarchy through time. We have selected on the given period the curves which best depict this evolution (Figure 1). The distributions which are represented correspond to the following census dates: 1831, 1846, 1861, 1876, 1891, 1906, 1921, 1936, 1954, 1975, 1982 and 1990. 
On the whole, the form of the urban hierarchy has persisted over the studied period. It is characterised by the maintenance of the primacy of Paris (ratio of 1:7 between the population of the agglomeration of Paris and that of the second city). The first 30 towns maintained between them almost constant size inequalities. Between the 10th and the 200th city, we can observe a change in the shape of the curves, which show in 1831 an upward concavity and in 1990 a downward concavity. This tendency demonstrates that during the observed period there occurred a reinforcement in the growth of the middle-sized cities. 
For each census we can adjust to a straight line the city size distribution (least squares method) by using Lotka’ s formulation. The difference from Pareto’s equation, is the application of the coefficient a 9 to the rank of city and not to the size of city (Pareto). 
The two formulations (Pareto and Lotka) can be related as:
The values of the straight rank-size slope (a’) have been computed for each threshold, at each census (Figure 2). With the exception of two censuses (1841 and 1954), the values are very close to each other, and the slope varies (in absolute value) from 0.7 to 1.1. 
The continuous increase of these values expresses a growth of the inequality of city size. This tendency slowed down or stopped between 1926 and 1954, and then shows a clear upturn since 1975. For the last census, the value of the slope remains constant and decreases for the sample of cities of more than 10 000 inhabitants. It is too early to decide whether this is a new tendency which will redistribute the population in middle-sized cities and will then reduce city size inequalities. In other words, is it a durable tendency which will produce what Parr calls a “U-shaped pattern”, or is it rather a short-time fluctuation? 
The joint representation of the two rank-size parameters (Figure 3) shows that the measures of the size of the urban system and the city-size inequality at each census are plotted almost exactly along a straight line. These two parameters, which express two different processes of development of urban systems, appear strongly linked by a linear relation. This means that there exists a stable relationship between the growth of the whole urban system (log a’) and that of the disymmetry of the city-size distribution (a’). This can be explained by a growing concentration of the population in the largest cities accompanied by a growth of the system’s size, producing a more and more contrasted city-size distribution (increase of a’) and a growth in the largest city size (increase of the intercept). 
For the last two decades, there has appeared an inversion of this tendency, due to a joint decrease of the two parameters. During this period, we observe a decrease of the city size inequality brought about by a faster growth of the small and middle-sized cities, probably owing to the saturation of the largest one. 
Malecki (1980) has examined the threshold size and its implications for the study of rank-size distributions. For this, he has taken all places in the American MidWest in 1970 and changed the threshold from 1 to 100 000. He found that the level of explained variance is lowest when the entire system is used. At the same time, he noticed that the slope parameter appeared fairly stable for a threshold contained between 500 and 5000. Beyond this threshold, the estimations are variable. Finally, the estimations provided by the urban systems with low threshold populations tend to be better than for the smallest sets of largest cities. 
Similarly, we wanted to test the rank-size parameters’ sensibility, using data on the French urban system between 1831 and 1990. For this, we have kept four census dates: 1831, 1881, 1931 and 1982; and six population thresholds between 2000 and 100 000 inhabitants. The results of those different adjustments appear in Table 1. 
We find, as noted by Malecki, that the best adjustment quality is for thresholds contained between 2000 and 10 000, regardless of the census date. We must underline the fact that cities are ranked in decreasing order and, therefore, the quality of a linear adjustment remains inevitably high. When the threshold increases, the number of cities decreases and the quality of the adjustment weakens. This measure is then not an accurate one for comparing samples of different sizes. 
On the other hand, for a given date, the slope parameter remains almost stable for a threshold between 2000 and 20 000 inhabitants. This population threshold, for which the adjustment of the city size distributions is carried out without ambiguity, appears considerably lower than those which have been used by different authors. This can explain why there exist so many controversies in the use of the rank-size model. Indeed, for our data, the behaviour of the parameter slope in the course of time differs in a significant way. If we use a population threshold smaller than 20 000, the slope parameter increases continuously between the four censuses, showing a progressive concentration of the population in the largest cities. However, if we take the sample of cities with populations of 50 000 or more between 1831 and 1982, the value of the parameter slope has decreased in a regular manner, showing a reduction of the inequality between the largest cities. 
Thus, when the entire system is used, inequality in city size has been accentuated over time. Inversely, when only the top of the hierarchy is considered, the city size inequality has been reduced. These are the middle-sized cities (between rank 10 and 100) which have modified their growth behaviour. At the beginning of the period, they develop more slowly than the rest of the urban system, then more and more quickly in the course of time, to finally grow at a faster rate than the whole of the system. 
These conflicting results led us to consider more carefully the use of the rank-size distribution. Moreover, they induce us to analyse more precisely the evolution of the middle-sized cities which show a non-Paretian behaviour during a large part of the period studied. Indeed, if we look at the rank-size curves, they show in their middle part (size between 10 000 and 60 000 in 1831, and between about 40 000 and 450 000 inhabitants in 1990), a downward concavity at the beginning of the period which progressively becomes an upward concavity at the end of the period. This behaviour cannot be described by a Pareto’s equation which supposes a linear relation between the number of cities and their size. Thus additional measures, like entropy, may be useful to obtain a good understanding of the evolution of the hierarchical organisation of cities (Frankhauser and Guerin-Pace, forthcoming). 
The variation in the course of time of the shape of the city size distribution may be attributed both to the growth of the system size, and to the variation in the inequality between the size of cities. Many empirical works have focused on the deviations of the rank-size distribution from Pareto’ s law and have discussed reasons for non-Paretian behaviour. In order to test this, Rosen and Resnick (1980) have added non-linear terms to Pareto’s equation which then becomes: 
The value of the parameter c, relevant to the quadratic term, indicates the direction of curvature in the classical representation of the curve, with indicating an upward concavity and a downward concavity. 
In terms of growth, the presence of an upward concavity in the curve reveals a smaller number of cities in the middle-sized class than predicted by Pareto’s law, while a downward concavity signifies a larger number of cities in these classes. 
Rosen and Resnick (1980) have studied the 50 largest cities of 44 countries, and obtained the value of the parameter c. They found an upward concavity for more than 30 countries. For the authors, this particular shape of the rank-size distribution probably means that the growth rates of the cities are positively correlated to size in these countries. “This may reflect scale economies … especially in the case of developing countries and certain mature countries such as France.”
In a general way, the presence of a curve in the rank-size distribution indicates a `violation’ of Gibrat’ s law of proportionate effect (1931) which states that relative growth rates are independent of city size and also independent over time (see Parr, 1976). These two assumptions are fundamental in order to generate a Pareto’s distribution (actually a lognormal distribution, which is very close to close to a Pareto’s when we do not integrate in the sample rural aggregates of population). 
Parr (1976) has discussed deviations from rank-size regularity and the interpretations which have been proposed by different authors. Haran and Vining (1973) stated that a curvature appears where intercity migration is an important cause of a city’s growth or decline. Ijiri and Simon (1974) have argued that the curvature of rank-size graphs may result from autocorrelation of growth rates over time, which expresses a selective growth process. Rosen and Resnick answer, without demonstrating, that “it seems reasonable that autocorrelated and a positive relation of growth rates are the primary factors combining to give upward concavity to most rank-size graphs”. As mentioned by Parr, Vining (1976) argued that it is not the effect of autocorrelated growth rates which produces the concavity, but rather the additional influence of negative correlation between growth rates and age which also imply a negative correlation between growth rates and size, since size is positively correlated with age. 
As data for a long time period were available, we found it interesting to study the evolution of this parameter c and to compare it with the shape of the rank-size distribution at each census. The adjusted line is given by the equation of Lotka, and we have shown the values of c for the different censuses (Figure 4). To interpret this figure, we can separate it into three periods. The first one running through 1896, where the values of c are positive, corresponds to a downward concavity of the curves - i.e. an increasing concentration of the population in the largest cities to the detriment of the middle-sized cities. A second period, which lasted until 1936, shows values of c close to zero, and reflects good abidance to the law of Pareto. Finally, since 1946, the values of the parameter c have been negative, and stress an overturn in the shape of the distribution - i.e. the number of cities of the middle-sized class have become greater than Pareto’s law predicted. This tendency is emphasised in the census of 1954 and 1962 after which is reversed, the parameter c approaching zero. 
We must notice that we do not find the same result as Rosen and Resnick for France in 1968. This arises from the population threshold of 100 000 which they used. Thus, only the upper part of the distribution corresponding to the higher level of the hierarchy is taken into account. It is essential to insist again on the necessity of comparing homogeneous sub-sets of cities, given the sensitivity of parameters to the sample size and the different definitions of the agglomerations. 
In order to test the suggested hypothesis to explain the different shapes of the rank-size curves, it is necessary to observe the values of the coefficients of correlation between city growth and city size over time (Figures 5 and 6). During the period under study, it appears that there is quite a strong correlation between city growth rate and city size (Figure 5). This correlation becomes stronger when we consider the logarithm of size and shows a non-linear relation between the population of cities and their growth rates. This feature can be related to the main evolutionary property of the urban system - i.e. its spatial pattern. Over time, geographical space is modified by the development of a transport network - what Jannelle (1969) called `shrinking space’. As the speed of communication increases, distance between cities is progressively reduced. Largest cities have a 
larger variety of services and extend their spatial range of commerce. This tends to hinder the development of smaller cities which is `short-circuited’ by the largest cities, even for the lowest economic functions, and tends to produce a more rapid development of the largest cities, which therefore increases the inequality between cities. A second type of deviation from the law of proportionate effect is the existence of a slight autocorrelation of growth rates over time. Calculated from one census to another, the value of correlation appears variable but significant, especially at the end of the 19th century and in recent decades (Figure 6). This reveals a selective tendency in the growth process, particularly during periods of sustained urban development, where it is the same cities which tend to grow, to stagnate or even to decline. 
Then the development of the urban system seems to proceed, not within a given class of city size, but rather over a set of cities independently of their size. We can relate this feature to the successive econom ic cycles which correspond to the different waves of technical innovation and favour a group of cities, affected by a given innovation, for a longer or shorter period of time. 
To measure the link between the shape of the curve and a possible relation between the growth and size of cities, we have calculated a coefficient of correlation between the values of the c parameter and the values of the correlation between city growth and size over time: the value obtained is 0.24. Although this value is weak, we cannot reject the hypothesis of a link between a positive correlation (between growth and size of cities), and an underrepresentation of cities which belong to middle class size. 
We have then tested the hypothesis of Ijiri and Simon, namely that the non-linear behaviour of the rank-size curves would result from a positive correlation of the growth rates over time. This indicates a selective growth process which is beneficial to the same cities over time. To investigate this hypothe sis, we have calculated the coefficient of correlation between the c parameter at the different censuses and the value of the correlation between successive values of growth rates. The value of the obtained correlation is close to zero. Thus, we cannot accept this hypothesis as the only factor responsible for the non-Paretian behaviour of the distributions. 
We can suggest as a last explanation of the shapes of the rank-size curves, a joint effect of a temporal autocorrelation of the growth rates and of a positive link between city growth rates and their size. We subsequently calculate the quality fit of a multiple regression where the endogenous variable 
would be the parameter c and the explicative variables would be the two different correlations (city growth and size, and growth over time). We then obtain a value of correlation of 0.8 - i.e. much higher than those obtained when using a single effect. Thus, it can be said that the non-Paretian behaviour of cities in the middle-size class, if it shows an upward concavity, can be explained by a positive relationship between growth rates and size of cities and a negative correlation of the cities’ growth rates over time. Conversely, the presence of a downward concavity (convexity) may be explained by a negative coefficient of the correlation growth size of cities and a positive one over time. Unfortunately, however, this explanation derives from transverse data. A next step to confirm these results would be to build simulations considering different hypotheses on the modes of growth and to test their impact on the evolution of observed city size distributions. 
We have attempted in this paper, with the help of a long time series data for French cities, to support urban theory. First, by showing that deviations from theoretical models which have been proposed in order to explain the regularities and the persistence of city size distributions over time, must be considered as specific properties of the evolution of urban systems which are related to the fact that they are living systems evolving in space, whereas the human dimension is modified in the course of time. 
It is within the modes of the growth process, therefore, and in its distribution amongst cities over the course of time, that we must search for explanations of the deviations of observed distributions from the rank-size model. Furthermore, we must additionally assert that this model, so often badly tested, and over identified, must only be considered as a state within a dynamic process of the evolution of city size and of the urban system. Pareto’s law cannot find its justification in a temporary logic of an equilibrium between the city sizes, but rather within a dynamic process which must be observed long term. 
