During the Soviet period, two contradictory forces influenced the process of urbanization in Russia. The dispersive force consisted of policies that sought to evenly distribute urban life and urban land in an effort to eradicate regional inequality. The creation of cities, located in accordance with this Marxist ideology, was an integral part of achieving national economic objectives. Counteracting this principle of dispersion, however, was the extremely centralized bureaucracy that channeled power and subordination along an administrative chain of command. The result of these two forces was the creation of an urban geography unique to the Soviet Union (Demko and Fuchs, 1984). The uniqueness of Soviet urban geography is a function of both a more even distribution of city size than found in market economies and a hierarchical network of interactions among cities. The purpose of this paper is to describe the distribution of urban areas by population before and after the dissolution of the USSR (1970–1999); a subsequent study describes the patterns of interaction among cities using migration flows (Iyer, 2003). 
Several studies indicate that the Soviet Union achieved the most evenly distributed city sizes when compared to those in other countries (Harris, 1970; Rosen and Resnick, 1980; Clayton and Richardson, 1989). Clayton and Richardson (1989) demonstrated that equality in city size had been achieved during the Soviet period primarily by increasing the population in small- to medium-sized cities. This implies that many cities and towns achieved a greater size due to Soviet migration policies than would have occurred without administratively managed migration (Harris, 1970; Gang and Stuart, 1999). Given the lifting of migration restrictions and the marketization of the economy after the dissolution of the Soviet Union, an initial hypothesis for this article is that city size in the Russian Federation today is becoming increasingly uneven, converging to the distribution found in market economies. However, as the analysis in this paper shows, increasing unevenness in city size depends on both the nature of variation that existed prior to the dissolution as well as the geographic location of urban areas within the network of cities. 
The methods developed in this paper are appropriate for census data that provide population statistics by city. The analysis is an extension of the work by Chauncy Harris (1970) on Soviet cities, as well as a modification of his rank-size method, which can be used not only for quantifying longitudinal change in urban systems but also for identifying “outliers” or deviations from “normality” for future case studies. The paper begins with an overview of the forces that influenced urbanization during the Soviet period, followed by a description of the research methods and methodology, and an analysis of the distribution of urban areas in the Russian Federation. 
The idiosyncratic distribution of cities in Russia reflects the inherent tensions within the system of centralized planning over the creation of population settlements. One primary principle of planned urbanization was equalization, as early Soviet planners incorporated the Marxist doctrine of equality into the distribution of urban populations and urban settlements (Enyedi, 1996). Planners designed policies to promote regional equality by eliminating the distinction between “town and country” (Demko and Fuchs, 1984). The many planning designs aligned with the concept of the “socialist” city include de-urbanism, garden city design, and linear cities (French, 1995). The spatial manifestation of these ideals created an urban geography based on an evenly dispersed population and the development of small to medium-sized cities. Achieving an optimum city size was widely accepted in the Soviet Union as an essential element of urban policy, of which an outgrowth became evenness in population size among cities (Clayton and Richardson, 1989). Beginning in the 1920s, ideal cities were considered to have 50,000–60,000 residents, which was large enough for economic sustainability yet small enough for fostering communal allegiances (Jensen, 1984). The actual size and definition of the optimal city, however, increased over time as the urban population in the USSR continued to grow. 
Counteracting this ideology of dispersed human settlement patterns was the highly centralized administrative infrastructure, which dictated a “top-down” nature of interaction among cities. The institutional integration of the Communist Party and the state apparatus at all levels of government became the fundamental instrument for centralized control. Governments in lower-level cities were both constrained by and dependent upon cities at the next highest level in the political hierarchy with respect to all aspects of local planning (Fainsod, 1965). Therefore, interaction among cities primarily occurred along the administrative chain of command, creating hierarchical pyramids devoid of horizontal linkages (Lewin, 1991). 
The interplay of these two contradictory principles created an urban geography unique to the Soviet Union, which was simultaneously more evenly distributed yet more extremely hierarchical than that in market economies. Between 1917 and 1991, migration flows exhibited three general trends: large-scale eastward movement into Siberia and the Far East, rural to urban migration, and a shift to large cities and administrative centers (Gibson, 1991). The latter trend occurred despite the dispersive forces influencing the urbanization process, which included policies intended to restrict the growth of large cities. This contradiction occurred because of the overriding influence of economic planning in urban development. At the local level, urban administration consisted of three bureaucratic decision-making entities: the local soviets (government), local Party officials, and industrial ministries (Bater, 1980). Because most Soviet cities existed to meet the needs of Soviet industry, the industrial ministries became the most powerful of the trio. Therefore, issues relating to industrial location tended to set the pace and place of urbanization. Aside from factors related to production, industrial enterprises were responsible for providing adequate housing for their workers, an investment that fell into the “non-productive” category. Hoping to benefit from economies of scale with respect to housing and urban amenities, many industrial ministries chose to locate where housing facilities and urban amenities had already been constructed (Huzinec, 1978). The embeddedness of industrial decision-making within the administrative infrastructure undermined planners’ goal for controlling city size (Clayton and Richardson, 1989). The reinforcing relationship between economic power and political strength instead created an urban hierarchy that paralleled the political hierarchy. 
The hierarchical nature of Soviet urban geography led to similarity among cities throughout the country that shared common characteristics such as administrative status, geographic location, and era of creation. Since the overall urban structure accounted for much of the variation among different types of cities, the assumption in this paper is that the transitions within individual cities after the dissolution of the USSR may exhibit regularity by city type. The debate regarding the causal influence between the urban structure and the individual city concerns the extent to which the future path of individual cities is a fixed product of the structural arrangements, past and present (Flanagan, 1993). Recent studies of urban systems in the United States begin at the level of the individual city by describing the local economic base, local politics, and local planning practices before placing the city within a national and even global network (Cronon, 1991; Sassen, 2001). 
The structure of urban systems can be viewed as the network of economic, political, and social interactions among and within cities. The predominant theories of spatial interaction identify patterns within that network. Each envisions a different emergent relationship among cities, and therefore attributes different relative positions, prominence, or centrality to cities within an urban system. Within the field of geography, central place theory posits uni-directional flow of consumers to markets between cities so that greater economic independence implies greater centrality. From the urban ecology perspective, interaction within the urban system is viewed as cooperative, so that greater functional interdependence implies greater centrality. Alternatively, theories from urban sociology stress the role of circulation and distribution within spatial networks so that greater ability to dominate the flow of resources within the system implies greater centrality. 
However, the optimal, fractal-like landscape of nested hexagons posited by central place theory (Losch, 1954), the equilibrial models in urban ecology (Hawley, 1986), and the world-systems models in political economy (Castells, 1977; Harvey, 1989) are criticized as being structurally deterministic. This determinism stems from the view that the position of a city with respect to the broader urban network essentially constrains and dictates the city’s possibilities for change. Many authors have argued (Giddens, 1984; Gottdiener, 1985) for a new agenda of research on urban systems that incorporates the local forces specific to each city, which either facilitate or hinder resistance to overarching regional trends. However, the causal influence between the urban structure and the individual city is certainly recursive— i.e., the qualities of the urban network and the individual cities that it comprises continuously interpenetrate and reconstitute one another (Giddens, 1984). 
The purpose of this paper is to compare longitudinally the distribution of city sizes in Russia before and after the dissolution of the Soviet Union in 1991. The distribution of urban areas at the macrolevel incorporates several different dimensions of interconnectedness within the urban system. The first dimension includes geographic location and the transportation network, which represents the physical layout of cities. Although the transportation network is arguably the outcome of political jockeying among cities, it is included in this first dimension since the physical space has not changed since the dissolution. The second dimension of urban interconnectedness involves population growth and decline. Given the high percentage of the urbanized population in Russia today (nearly 80%) and negative rate of natural increase, the primary cause of urban redistribution is interurban migration, which represents flows between cities. The final dimension of urban interconnectedness includes administrative designations within the Russian Federation, which involves non-spatial aspects of interactions among cities. This dimension has changed both de jure and de facto during the transition as the influence of the central government has waned within the provinces. 
The sources of data for population by city from 1970 to 1999 include three censuses of the USSR (1970, 1979, 1989; see Goskomstat SSSR, 1989, 1992) and estimated inter-censal data from the Russian State Statistical Committee (Goskomstat Rossii, 1994, 1999). All cities in Russia with a population of 12,000 or greater in the 1989 census were included in the analysis (n = 1107). The prior populations of these cities were gathered from previous censuses. Many cities, however, either did not exist prior to 1989 or were not formerly classified as urban-type settlements. With very few exceptions, cities with a population of at least 20,000 in 1989 were also listed in the previous censuses and, without exception, all cities of at least population 55,000 in 1989 were listed previously. As shown in Table 1, of the 1,107 Russian cities with populations greater than 12,000 in 1989, data could be found for 816 cities in 1970 and 826 cities in 1979. Going forward from the 1989 census, 21 cities were not accounted for in 1994. In 1999, 19 cities were reclassified as rural because of out-migration from urban areas and, therefore, not included. Table 1 also shows that the rate of urbanization has dramatically declined since the USSR’s dissolution, due primarily to negative natural increase (Field, 2000), but also to the reversing trend of urban-to-rural migration (Mitchneck and Plane, 1995b). 
Several issues arise when comparing data collected during the Soviet period and since the transition. First, the Soviet censuses of 1970 and 1979 enumerate both a “present” (nalichnoye, or de facto) and “permanent” (postoyannoye, or de jure) population for each city. The “present” population includes all persons present at a location at the time of enumeration, whereas the “permanent” population includes all persons whose residence is registered in a particular city (Anderson and Silver, 1985). The 1989 census, however, reports only the “present” population, and therefore the subsequent analysis in this paper is performed on the “present” population reported in the 1970 and 1979 censuses as well as the 1994 and 1999 intercensal population estimates. Second, the 1989 census also includes both the Soviet name for each city and the post-Soviet name, where applicable. Most name changes involved the reversion of larger, prominent cities to a pre-Soviet or historic name, e.g., Leningrad was restored to St. Petersburg and Gorky was restored to Nizhniy Novgorod. In this paper, cities are referred to by their post-Soviet names. Finally, many changes to municipal boundaries occurred after 1991, so that comparisons of population size require retrospective redefinition.
Aside from the special status given to Moscow and St. Petersburg, the other 87 subjects of the Russian Federation were administratively structured on two principles during the Soviet period. The first division separated titular and ethnic peoples within the country and is distinguished using the following nomenclature: autonomous republic (ASSR), autonomous oblast, and autonomous okrug (AO). The other division, based on a territorial principle, includes oblasts and krays. Most of the borders set during the Soviet period have been maintained since the dissolution (Stavrakis et al., 1997). During the Soviet period, these different structures were all centrally linked via the Communist Party, which rendered them different but equal. Several studies have shown that each type of Federation subject has been able to achieve differential levels of sovereignty and/or economic independence since the dissolution (Mitchneck, 1995a; Debardeleben, 1997; Stoner-Weiss, 1997). 
The population within the Soviet city represents the confluence of several important factors, and according to Harris (1970), is the key characteristic for understanding or classifying the Soviet urban network. Population size within a city is highly correlated with economic opportunities, which in turn is a function of and contributes to the political power or position of a city. In addition, due to the social contract between the Soviet state and the workers, population size is a reliable indicator for the availability of housing and other local amenities. 
Given the importance of population size for cities in Russia, the implicit assumption in this analysis is that changes in the interactions between cities will manifest themselves as a change at the macrolevel in the distribution of city size. City size in terms of population follows a skewed distribution, as many cities tend to be small and few cities tend to be large. The stochastic phenomenon that can alter the distribution is either unequal natural increase among cities or uneven population movement via migration. Empirical studies of urban areas in many industrialized nations show a robustness of city size distribution over time (Krugman, 1996), which means that movement in population occurred without changing the underlying distribution. 
The regularity of the distribution has led to what is known as the rank-size rule (Zipf, 1941). By ordering cities according to population size and fitting a power curve to the data, the value of the power provides an index for the distribution of city size. In particular, the index can be used as a measure of change by conducting the same empirical analysis of city size at various points in time. Based upon empirical data from industrialized nations, the distribution can be described by the following relationship: 
where i is the ordered rank of cities (i is the set of counting integers) and Ni is the population in the i-th city. The power, b, is derived from the empirical data. For b close to zero, the distribution of city size is uniform, and for b greater than one, the distribution is skewed. A skewed distribution of city size results from one of two phenomena: a small number of disproportionately large cities or a large number of medium-sized cities that are markedly larger than the smaller ones in the set. In the United States, the power has remained close to 1 for the past 150 years (Krugman, 1996). As with any power relation, when b = 1, the phenomenon is replicable at all scales (Simon, 1969), i.e., for geographic areas smaller than the entire country. 
The general formula for the empirical relationship is a power law that can be expressed as: 
where a can be interpreted as the predicted or estimated population for the largest city included in the analysis. 
The estimation of the two parameters depends upon the cities that are included in the analysis. Sets of cities can form either a geographic region or a more conceptual region based on the linkages that interconnect them. Harris (1970) suggests a method for empirically defining regions based on the statistical regularity of settlement patterns identified by the rank-size method. He suggests that if the estimated population for the largest city is greater than the observed population then the set of cities included in the analysis spans multiple regions with multiple centers. Conversely, if the estimated population for the largest city is less than the observed population then the largest city can be considered a primate city, which means that the set of cities corresponds to only a partial region. A primate city administratively serves or economically interacts with a larger set of cities than that included in the analysis. 
Thus, the two parameters, where a estimates the population size of the largest city and b summarizes variation in city size, are derived from a set of cities that empirically defines a region. As the parameters are independent of units, they can be used to compare a set of cities across time and space. Based on the two parameters estimated using the rank-size rule, each set of cities can be classified as to both its wholeness as a region and the variation in city size (see Table 2). 
Because of the dispersive migration policies during the Soviet period that influenced urbanization, I initially hypothesized that change in city-size distribution since the dissolution measured by the overall distribution (parameter b) would be less than 1 but would steepen between 1989 and 1999. In other words, the variation among Soviet cities in terms of population size would be less than that found in nations where urbanization was influenced by a market economy; but then variation would increase during the transition as post-Soviet Russia moves toward a market economy. As the analysis in this paper shows, Western Russia appears to be converging whereas Eastern Russia does not. Therefore, increasing variation in city size appears to depend on the nature of variation that existed prior to the dissolution as well as geographic location. 
In order to characterize the distribution of urban areas in Russia over time, the parameters of the rank-size relationship were calculated for geographical and conceptual regions. Since population data are collected for five different years, a change in the parameters occurs four times: 1970–1979, 1979–1989, 1989–1994, and 1994–1999. The periods of interest in the analysis (1989–1999) span the dissolution of the USSR in 1991. All cities were ranked according to population size separately for all five time periods, which means that a city’s rank could change from one period to the next (see Table 3). The estimated parameters of the rank-size method are derived from basic population statistics for Soviet/Russian cities (see Fig. 1). 
Since the general equation (2) of the power law is one equation with two unknowns, the number of cities included in the empirical definition of the region needed to be constrained along dimensions that divided all cities into two groups. For dichotomous groupings (cities in West or East Russia, cities along rail lines, and cities experiencing population decline from 1989–1994 and 1994–1999), the number of cities was constrained such that the estimated population of the largest city equals the actual population in 1989—i.e., when a = N1 (1989). In these cases, the change in parameter a over time retains little interpretation, and therefore analysis is reported only with respect to variation in city size, parameter b.
For all cities in Russia, the parameter for the variation in city size remained at b = 0.86 from 1970 to 1999. The magnitude of this parameter over time is less than that observed in the United States (Krugman, 1996), and similar to other studies of rank-size analysis of Soviet cities, including the Harris study. The initial hypothesis of an increase in variation after 1991, however, is not observed. Two factors contribute to the robustness of the distribution of city size over time. First, given the high number of large cities in Russia, population size according to rank is densely packed when all cities are included. For example, 13 cities including Moscow and St. Petersburg had a population size greater than 1 million in 1999; 20 more had a population size greater than 500,000. The numbers of cities in each category are comparable to those in the United States in 1999, which contributes to the robustness of the U.S. distribution as well. Second, all of the administrative capitals for the 89 subjects of the Russian Federation are ranked within the first 110 cities (the first 40 are exclusively administrative capitals). As almost all of these towns have declined in population since the dissolution in 1991, the constant level of variation among city size implies that population movement occurred without altering the underlying distribution (see below). 
The constant level of variation among city size, however, is not replicated at the next geographic scale when the country is divided into West and East Russia. Instead, the two geographic areas of Russia have distinct urban distributions (see Fig. 2). For cities in West Russia, the variation of city size between 1970 and 1999 began and continued to approach the level found in the United States. In 1970, the calculation of the parameter for the variation of city size yields b = 0.94. Variation of city size then increases to b = 0.97 between 1979 and 1994 and rose again to b = 0.98 by 1999. The increase in variation among city size in Western Russia, therefore, began prior to the dissolution of the FSU and continued afterwards despite the decline in population of the largest cities since 1991. Instead, a disproportionate growth in medium-sized cities has distinguished the larger cities in Western Russia from the smaller ones no longer targeted by population growth policies. 
In contrast, cities in Eastern Russia exhibited less variation in city size. The parameter for the variation of city size peaks in 1989 at b = 0.89, but then slightly decreases to b = 0.88 in 1999. The decrease in variation is the result of increased uniformity among the regions in Eastern Russia (see below). Therefore, the initial hypothesis of increased variation in city size after the USSR’s dissolution is substantiated in Western Russia but not in Eastern Russia. 
These findings show that the differing histories of the urbanization process in Western and Eastern Russia have led to a difference in the distribution of the urban areas. The history of urban settlement in European Russia dates several centuries before the Bolshevik Revolution in 1917. The geographic location of cities was determined for similar reasons as other medieval European cities: the strategic defense of Moscow, proximity to the Volga River, and other physical advantages (Lewin, 1991). Very few cities in Eastern Russia experienced such “organic” formation. Settlement of Siberia and the Far East was difficult due to the extreme climate conditions; however, the completion of the Trans-Siberian Railway in the late 19th century and the Baikal-Amur Mainline (BAM) in the 1980s opened Siberia and the Far East to urban settlement. Several cities were created (or greatly expanded) along or near these rail lines in Eastern Russia during the Soviet period to either support the national economy by extracting resources or promote socialist ideology. Of the cities that did exist prior to 1917, those receiving the designation as administrative capital of their province grew significantly during the Soviet period. 
The separate development patterns are exaggerated by the different types of rail network that developed in Western and Eastern Russia. In Western Russia, the pattern of rail lines extends radially from Moscow, whereas in Eastern Russia, the transportation infrastructure is linear and even nodal, as several cities are only accessible by air. As hypothesized, variation of city size for cities within 10 km of a rail line mirrors variation of the whole country and of Eastern Russia. The calculation of the variation parameter for cities along a rail line remains constant at b = 0.88 across all years. This level of variation in city size is slightly greater than that calculated for the country as a whole and slightly less than that for Eastern Russia. The first relationship exists because almost all of the administrative centers lie along the transportation infrastructure, and as discussed previously, the administrative capitals heavily influence the size distribution of all cities. The second relationship is due to the coupling of population settlement with rail development in Eastern Russia. Cities not within 10 km of a rail line exhibited very little variation in city size, as parameter b ranges from 0.60 to 0.625. 
The next dimension of urban interconnectedness creates sets of cities based upon population growth or decline within urban areas. Although the country experienced negative natural increase in population due to economic uncertainty after the dissolution of the USSR (Heleniak, 1997; Field, 2000), the primary cause of population redistribution in Russia has been migration (Piterski, 1997). Therefore, this dimension mainly represents the flows between urban areas. Although legal restrictions on population movement were officially lifted with ratification of the 1993 Russian constitution (Buckley, 1995), the confluence of economic factors limited realizable mobility. Because of the social contract between the state and the workers during the Soviet period, many social benefits were provided through the workplace, including housing, day care, health and recreation facilities, and access to scarce food items and consumer goods (Mitchneck and Plane, 1995a). During the early phase of the Russian transition (1991–1994), Russian firms were slow to shed excess labor, so that unemployment was not a significant determinant of migration in post-Soviet Russia. Many workers chose to remain in pre-existing employment situations even at the risk of severe underemployment (Gimpelson and Lippoldt, 1997; Heleniak, 2002). Coupled with the loss of several months of unpaid back wages, shortages of money rendered workers immobile during the early phase of the transition. Additionally, individual cities continue to impose residential controls in order to limit growth (Katanian, 1998). Both wealthy urban regions and regions with ethnic conflict have an interest in limiting migration. Cities such as Moscow and St. Petersburg have circumvented the laws aimed at lifting mobility restrictions by imposing a high registration fee on individuals wishing to register as residents. This, of course, has led to underestimation of population size in the largest cities, as Goskomstat statistics are only for the official number of residents. 
Despite these impediments to mobility, migration is contributing to the growth and decline of cities in Russia, with the patterns often differing from those prior to the dissolution. Along this dimension, four conceptual regions comprise the set of cities experiencing either population growth or decline from 1989 to 1994 and from 1994 to 1999. For both sets of cities experiencing growth, variation in city size is very low (parameter b ranges from 0.3 to 0.4). The low level of variation is due to the fact that mostly medium-sized cities, particularly in the more temperate southwestern part of the country, experienced population growth after 1991. Only one city with a population larger than 1 million, Kazan’ in the Volga region, grew during this time. Conversely, cities that lost population since the USSR’s dissolution exhibit much greater variation in city size than those that gained (see Fig. 3). 
For the set of cities that declined in population between 1989 and 1994, the level of variation in city size ranges from b = 1.06 to b = 1.08. The skewed distribution for the variation in city size is a function of the types of cities experiencing population decline immediately after the dissolution. All but three cities with a population over 1 million as well as many cities under 100,000 declined between 1989 and 1994. Conspicuously absent in this set of declining cities are medium-sized cities of between 100,000 and 1 million population. Therefore, the increased variation in city size for this set of cities is due to the mid-sized cities being both similar to the largest ones and also markedly larger than the smaller ones. 
For the set of cities experiencing population decline between 1994 and 1999, the variation in city size is lower (parameter b = 0.96 across all time periods). The more uniform level of variation in city size is due to the lessening disparity between large and small cities, with the disproportionate loss in population at the high end. This set of cities includes all cities of over 1 million population (except Kazan’) and several medium- to small-sized cities. 
The two types of conceptual regions along the dimension for administrative designations consist of: (1) the administrative capitals of the 87 provinces plus Moscow and St. Petersburg; and (2) the aggregation of the provinces into the eleven economic planning zones created during the Soviet period. For these sets of cities, both parameters of the rank-size method can be estimated. 
The national capital, Moscow, is the largest city in the country, followed by St. Petersburg, which has slightly more than half of Moscow’s population. As these two cities remain the first- and second-ranked cities across all time periods, the rank-size method produces an estimate for the population size (parameter a) of Moscow as the largest city in the set of administrative capitals. During the time period considered in this analysis, the estimated population size follows the same trend as the observed population, initially increasing and then decreasing after 1989 (see Fig. 4). However, in 1970, the rank-size method estimates a population size nearly equal to but slightly greater than observed and then subsequently estimates a population size less than observed. According to the method of interpretation described previously, the relationship of the estimated versus actual population size for the largest city implies that the set of cities consisting of administrative capitals can be considered a self-contained region. After 1979, however, the set of administrative capitals becomes a partial region with Moscow serving as a primate city. 
The second parameter of the rank-size method for the variation of city size among administrative capitals steadily decreases between 1970 and 1999. The reason for the decrease in variation, however, differs before and after the dissolution. Before 1989, the increasing evenness among these cities is due to the disproportionate growth of smaller cities and large cities in the Urals/Siberia, such as Perm’ and Vladivostok. After 1989, the increasing evenness is attributable to the disproportionate loss of population in both Moscow and St. Petersburg. Therefore, the set of administrative capitals experienced both the reclassification from a whole to partial region and increasing evenness in city size. The combination is the result of disproportionate growth in the small-sized capitals that served to increase the prominence of Moscow with respect to medium-sized cities. 
As mentioned previously, the administrative capital of each province tends to be the largest city; similarly, the administrative center of the economic planning zone is the largest administrative capital among the grouped provinces. However, the cities receiving the designation as administrative center of a planning region grew disproportionately as they acquired political and economic power (Huzinec, 1978). The positive association of administrative status and population growth is evidenced by the growth of Murmansk in the North region. Until 1979, the largest city among the five provinces today located in the North region was Arkangel’sk. These provinces were administratively part of the Northwest region, but with the separation into the North and Northwest regions in 1979, Murmansk became the administrative center of the new North region. By 1989, Murmansk had surpassed Arkangel’sk as the largest city in the region. 
Unlike the robustness in the distribution of city size over time observed for dichotomous categorizations of Russian cities (see subsections on Geography/Transportation and Population Mobility), the variation in city size for the economic planning zones exhibits much larger ranges from 1970 to 1999. The calculation of the variation in city size at a smaller geographic scale with fewer cities14 in each region allows for the possibility of a larger range over time (see Figs. 5 and 6). For example, the variation in city size for cities in the Volga-Vyatka region steadily and significantly increases from 1970 to 1999, as parameter b ranges from 1.07 to 1.2. For this region, the increase in variation of city size after the USSR’s dissolution is due to the disproportionate growth of medium-sized cities (population 100,000– 300,000) and the decline in population of both large and small cities. 
In West Russia, the variation in city size (parameter b) exhibits a large range across regions as well as over time. In 1970, variation of city size is most even in the Central region (b = 0.95) and most skewed in the Volga region (b = 1.2). By 1999, the overall range across regions increases with the North Caucasus region experiencing more evenness in the variation of city size (b = 0.90) and the Volga region experiencing more skewness (b = 1.3). The decreased variation in city size for the North Caucasus region is only marginally due to the non-reporting of Groznyy, the capital of Chechnya; instead, many of the smaller cities in this region have experienced disproportionate growth. On the other hand, the Volga region has experienced the disproportionate growth of its largest cities, Kazan’ and Volgograd, which is unlike the reason for the increase in variation for the Volga-Vyatka region discussed above. 
In East Russia, each of the four regions exhibits high variation in city size, as parameter b consistently remains greater than 1 from 1970 to 1999 (see Fig. 6). However, the level of dispersion across regions lessens over time. In 1970, the disparity across regions is high, as parameter b ranges from 1.02 in the Urals to 1.2 in West Siberia. By 1999, the range of dispersion across regions narrows as each region appears to converge to a similar level of variation in city size (parameter b ranges from 1.04 in the Urals to 1.09 in West Siberia). The convergence toward a smaller range contributes to the already even variation of city size for all cities in East Russia; the calculation for all East Russian cities remains low (parameter b = 0.89) from 1970 to 1999. This juxtaposition epitomizes the outcome of the contradictory forces that created a unique Soviet urban geography: the dispersive forces of the urbanization process (subsidies for production in smaller towns, large city growth restrictions, expansion methods for population distribution) impacted the aggregated urban structure resulting in the evenness of city size at the larger geographic scale, whereas the agglomerative forces impacted urbanization at the regional level resulting in the high variation in city size at the smaller geographic scale. This structural imprint of urban areas, which the Russian Federation inherited after the dissolution of the USSR, contributes to the strategic position of the regional administrative centers during the transition. 
Both of the rank-size parameters (a and b) are estimated for the administrative capitals and economic planning zones, so that sets of cities can be classified according to their wholeness as a region and variation in city size (see Table 2). With only two exceptions, all sets of cities remain in the same class across all time periods (see Fig. 7). As discussed above, between 1970 and 1979 Moscow shifts from being the center among administrative capitals to being their primate city. The other shift in classification occurs for the largest city in the Volga-Vyatka region, Nizhniy Novgorod, which moves from being a primate city to being one of many centers after 1989. As mentioned previously, several medium-sized cities grew in this region, thereby lessening the prominence of the administrative center.15 With respect to the rank-size parameter for the variation in city size, all sets of cities experienced some fluctuation over time in parameter b; however, none crosses the reference line (b = 1) at any point. 
Finally, all of the economic planning zones in Eastern Russia fall into the same category: multiple regions with multiple centers exhibiting large variation in city size. As most of the urbanization in Siberia and the Far East occurred during the Soviet period, the lack of horizontal linkages among urban areas is most acute, resulting from the extremely hierarchical nature of interactions. During the 1970s, the State Planning Committee (Gosplan) acknowledged the need to encourage the development of an integrated urban network in this area. The 1975 General Scheme of Settlement explicitly states as one of its objectives: “the development of new networks of urban and rural places in Siberia and the Far East” (Demko, 1987). The nature of interactions among cities given this context serves to increase the regional center’s prominence as well as separating distinct regions from each other. 
The primary purpose of this paper is to characterize the distribution of urban areas in Russia longitudinally at the national and regional level in order to test the hypothesis that the variation in city size would increase with the loosening of mobility restrictions after the dissolution of the USSR. I summarize the detailed analysis in this paper in Table 4; the table shows that the variation in city size increases after 1989 for six sets of cities, all of which had high variation prior to the dissolution. The reason for the increasing variation differs for remote as opposed to central regions. In the regions with extreme weather conditions (North, East Siberia, and Far East), the increase in variation is due to the decline of small- or medium-sized cities. In the more temperate and/or centrally located regions (Northwest, Volga-Vyatka, and Central Black Earth), the increase in variation is due to growth of large and medium-sized cities. Therefore, increasing unevenness in city size after the dissolution of the USSR depends upon the nature of variation that existed during the Soviet period (high variation previously has led to even greater variation) as well as the geographic location of cities within the overall network of urban areas (greater variation in remote areas due to decline whereas in central areas due to growth). 
The methodology using the rank-size rule for measuring the distribution over time and space provides a useful classification scheme for identifying potential regions that do and do not follow aggregate trends. For the analysis in this paper, this method has provided a quantitative distinction between the distribution of cities in Western and Eastern Russia, as well as a visual definition for the inherited Soviet urban geography—i.e., high variation regionally yet low variation in the aggregate. Future analysis of more recent data should reinforce these and other conclusions, namely robustness of the rank-size parameters over time and a distinctiveness of the parameters over space. The stability of the overall distribution of urban areas is unlikely to change dramatically after 1999, but the future path of urban areas in West and East Russia is less certain. Extrapolating from the analysis in this paper, I hypothesize that West Russia will continue to converge toward the distribution found in market economies whereas East Russia will continue to exhibit the distinctiveness of Soviet-era urbanization. 
However, the characterization of the distribution of cities according to population is only suggestive of the linkages that exist among cities. The rank-size rule cannot account for the changes in the underlying stochastic processes that form the distribution of city size, namely the shifting of cities according to their rank. One reason for the shift in rank is the level of interconnectedness and interdependence among cities, which may serve to propel or perpetuate a city’s prominence within a network. In the Soviet case, the urban hierarchy paralleled the political hierarchy such that linkages between cities followed the administrative chain of command. The current devolution of power from the center has strategically equipped the regional-level governments, particularly in remote regions, with both the power and the authority to dominate subordinate municipalities. The findings in this paper regarding the distribution of urban areas confirm the tendency for political decentralization to lead to greater regionalization in post-Soviet Russia. 

