In many cases, simple functional forms explain surprisingly well empirical distributions of variables no matter how complicated the interrelations of their determinants might be. Distributions of population sizes of urban areas within city systems are an example. The relation of sizes is governed by a complex structure of economic and social rules. Nevertheless, evidence suggests that the distributions exhibit surprising regularities across different countries. 
The most familiar hypothesis on the form of such distributions is the so-called rank size rule according to which the product of each city’s size and its rank (defined as one plus the number of cities with larger population) is a constant of the city system. Statistical tests of this hypothesis in the literature lack a proper statistical foundation for the following reason. In order to interpret the significance of a regression coefficient (see, e.g., Alperovich [l]), the logarithms of the rank of the size variables have to be assumed normally distributed at least in the limit. Only in this case can the t-statistic be used to test significance of least-squares estimates. But with normally distributed random variables, the concept of rank of a city becomes meaningless: With positive probability, the largest city’s rank can be between say 10 and 11. The present paper shows how to overcome such problems by using a maximum likelihood approach in a statistical model that is specified with greater care. 
Take a sample of N cities, and let x(i) be the number of people living in i. is the order statistic, then the rank of a city is defined by
It is necessary to distinguish a deterministic and a probabilistic interpretation of the rank size rule (RSR). The deterministic version of the rule states that
and it is a special case of the log-linear equation 
Therefore it is possible to fit a straight line in the double logarithmic model (3) and to discuss whether the straight line fits the data. Rosen and Resnick [13], for example, compare the line with the fit of quadratic and cubic curves. 
While it might be interesting to observe that some curves fit better than others it remains unclear what other authors using this approach mean with “significance” when they talk about a being significantly different from one. Before it is possible to discuss significance it is necessary to formulate a probabilistic model. And if the t-statistic is used for the least-squares (LS) estimates the author must have in mind a stochastic version of (3) such a 
Where the random variables V, are (asymptotically) normal. But in this model the probability that the rank of the largest city is between say 2.3 and 2.5 is positive! Two problems appear: 
-The rank can only be an integer number-a property that should be relaxed more carefully. 
-The rank is a monotonic function of the city size. This property is essential to the rank and therefore should be fully taken care of. 
We will formulate the probabilistic model such that there is a natural RSR hypothesis which is also convenient for calculations. Imagine that the sampling process has generated an order statistic from N iid. random variables. The distribution function F represents the probability of realization of each city size x. This abstraction is necessary because it is usually possible to observe all the population sizes of the cities in a country. Even incomplete samples are usually complete but truncated (i.e., of the form “All cities with more than x0 inhabitants”). 
Note that the deterministic RSR in (2) is a hypothesis on the sample and not on the distribution function F. So in order to formulate a rank size law in the statistical sense it is necessary to refine the concept of a “rank of a city”. Fortunately the rank function R is closely related to a well known statistic. Define 
Rg, is just the straightforward extension of R to the whole range of real numbers, using population sizes as domain instead of names as R does. Comparing Rg, with the empirical distribution function FN, it is obvious that. The empirical distribution function converges to the theoretical distribution function when the sample becomes large. So it appears natural to derive the “true rank” of a city from 
We say that in a sample of size N the city i has the theoretical rank which is not necessarily an integer number but is strictly increasing in the city size. Moreover, the RSR can be formulated in terms of Rg as
which is a special case of the Pareto distribution function 
with density
So in the following the RSR null hypothesis is a = 1 with the maintained hypothesis that cities are distributed according to the Pareto law (8). 
Once the probabilistic model is adopted it is no longer efficient to estimate a and c by least-squares methods. While the LS estimator is consistent, it seems impossible to calculate its finite sample distribution or its bias. In addition, there are no results available about its asymptotic distribution, so that parameter tests cannot be performed. Surprisingly, this simple observation is not recognized in the literature. For example, E. Mills claims that “the best way to think systematically about sizes of urban areas is to think of them as a frequency distribution,” thus proposing our approach. He even formulates the RSR as a special case of the Pareto distribution, but still he ends up using (2) to estimate a. Then he tests for a= 1 with the t-statistic although in our context this test is invalid. 
Malik [6] discusses efficient estimation of the parameters if both (a and c are unknown, but here the problem is solved much easier. The samples available for the population size have the form “All agglomerations with at least x0 inhabitants.” Hence the N iid. random variables are distributed with the conditional distribution function 
In other words, the truncated distribution is again a Pareto distribution with parameters cx and x0. This result is extremely useful: Instead of estimating the constant c, it is replaced by x0 which is available from the sample information! 
For the second parameter, a, the maximum likelihood estimator can now be calculated easily. Let; then the log-likelihood function is
With derivatives
A critical point is found at
L has a maximum at 4 since the second order condition holds. Therefore the ML estimator for a is The properties of this estimator can be derived with elementary statistical means. Transform the Pareto distribution to 
and observe that the x are iid. with distribution function 
From a well-known property of the exponential distribution, their sum, x, has a gamma distribution with parameters N and l/e. Thus it is possible to compute the moments 
Hence is unbiased and the Rao-Cramer inequality implies that 8 is a minimum variance estimator as holds.
Since the distribution of the estimator was derived in (14) it is possible to test the RSR hypothesis. For each significance level a critical interval is constructed symmetrically around such that. This test can be justified as an approximation to the likelihood ratio test. The logarithm of the likelihood ratio is derived as 
Taking a Taylor series expansion of at, we get 
The error term R, goes to zero as. If the speed of convergence is of order then. R, converges to zero and it is possible to approximate 
The test inequality constant leads to the symmetric interval as critical region of the test. Note that the significance level of this test is exact. Among all tests with a given significance level we select one with almost maximal power. The approximation concerns only the probability of rejecting the null hypothesis although it is true. 
If we test the RSR within our framework there is no correlation coefficient R2 to measure the goodness of fit. But there are two possibilities to check the maintained hypothesis. On the one hand the Kolmogoroff-Smirnow test or the test can be applied to compare the empirical and the theoretical distribution functions for large samples. On the other hand it is possible to use (9) on the “tail” of the sample: Truncate the sample at xj > x0 and reestimate the parameter a. Then it becomes possible to test for each xj the hypothesis that the new estimate equals the old 2 with the procedure described above for the RSR. 
Both ways do not satisfy entirely: While the asymptotic procedures rely on large samples without specifying how many observations are “large,” the latter test is incorrect because the “true value” used for the null hypothesis is estimated from the data. In addition the Kolmogoroff-Smirnow result is unreliable because its asymptotic distribution does not hold for estimated a. But, in sum, these tests should indicate whether the Pareto distribution explains the data. 
The samples used for estimation are from the UN Demographic Yearbook [15], which publishes all cities with at least 100,000 inhabitants. In addition there were available all 221 communities with at least 10,000 inhabitants in the GDR [14] and all 493 communities with at least 20,000 inhabitants in West Germany [2]. The sample published by the UN was used before by Alperovich [l]. As shown above there is no problem from the truncation of the samples, but for many countries the samples are not large enough for decisive conclusions. So it might be interesting to test the RSR for a better sample. 
In table 1 three estimates for the coefficient a are listed. The first one is the LS solution of the regression 
The second coefficient is calculated using the truncation assumption in (19). Even though the estimated constant in the first regression was significantly different from zero in more than half of the cases the restricted estimation does not alter the conclusions from the t-test essentially: For Mexico and Romania the significance levels of similar values for a become dubious and for Sweden the estimated value for a changes from 1.1 to 1.3. However, Romania and Sweden belong to the countries with less than twenty listed cities and Mexico is the only medium sized sample (above 50 cities) with a regression coefficient not significantly different from 1. So the LS estimation results reflect the general opinion about the RSR: 
(1) The coefficients seem to be “significantly different” from one in almost all cases even for countries with fewer than 40 cities in the sample. 
(2) The R-square values are (with the exception of Romania) above 0.94 with a tendency to be higher for large samples.
And the conclusion would be that “… the Pareto distribution provides a very accurate description of the distribution of population sizes of urban areas…” and that “…the rank size rule can be rejected...” as E. Mills states for the USA.
This conclusion is now compared with the tests on the ML estimator, which is the third a listed in the table. A gamma-distributed estimator needs a sample of 350 cities to determine a + 10% interval at a 95% significance level! So it is not surprising that in many cases the RSR cannot be rejected. Extreme examples are Poland, Spain, and Italy with a larger than 1.3 not ruled out to be different from one. For the large GDR sample the coefficient of 1.08 is not significantly different from one while the LS estimates reject the RSR with the t-test. Thus the conclusion from the t-test is at least dubious. 
The tests for the validity of the Pareto distribution do not unambiguously indicate a good fit. While the West German sample fits extremely well, the “truncated tail test” rejects the Pareto distribution for the USSR and for the “agglomeration” sample of the USA and the test rejects it for the GDR. So three out of four samples with over 200 cities do not support the Pareto distribution, although the R2 are almost one.” 
For smaller samples the tests in most cases do not reject the hypothesis, but this comes from the insufficient sample size and does not provide strong evidence for the validity of the Pareto law. So apart from numerical deviation of the estimates the answers to the problem are qualitatively different: 
(1) In some cases the coefficients were different from one rejecting the RSR, but for most countries larger samples are necessary. 
(2) It is surprising how much can be explained with a one-parameter distribution, but for large samples this simple distribution turns out to be wrong in many cases. 
All together the evidence for the RSR points more to a statistical artifact than to an “empirical law.” 
If the population size of an urban area is distributed according to the Pareto law and if the sample of observed cities is truncated, then the ML estimator for the parameter of a Pareto distribution turns out to be I-distributed. A test for the validity of the rank size rule was derived and applied to the distribution of population sizes in several countries. Even though the sample used in this study was not rich enough to derive definite empirical results it could be demonstrated that the theoretical caution about standard methods is also of empirical importance: Parameter estimates and test conclusions change if a proper model is employed. 






	





