Distributions of city-size over time provide a tool for the inspection of overall trends of population concentration in core areas and its dispersion to the peripheries (Richardson, 1973; Carroll, 1982; Roehner, 1991). Trends of population movement between core and periphery are very often related to trends of economic development (Mera, 1973; Richardson and Schwartz, 1988; Alperovich, 1992). These relationships were formalised in terms of a turning-point. Williamson (1965) suggested that countries undergo a turning-point from increasing to decreasing levels of regional inequality as they move up on the scale of economic development. Fifteen years later Alonso (1980) attempted a generalisation of the turning-point hypothesis by pointing towards no less then five bell shapes in development. More recently, Parr 
(1985) suggested that city-size distributions over time also follow a U-shaped turning-point from an initial trend of concentration of population in the larger cities to trends of dispersion towards smaller urban units. Israel, as a country developed rapidly during the second half of this century, represents an ideal case study for testing the turning-point hypothesis. Besides, the examination of city-size distribution in Israel merits special attention due to previous findings that have singled out its presumably unique course of development (Vining, 1986). 
The aim of this study is to examine the turning-point hypothesis in city-size distribution by reviewing the Israeli urban system over time using metropolitan area boundaries. It is hypothesised, on grounds that will be explained later, that the effects of powerful population dispersal policies in Israel (Shachar, 1971) were counterbalanced by internal migration from the periphery to the core regions, resulting in a relatively stable city-size distribution. The rest of this section will briefly describe the Israeli arena and present local related literature. A comprehensive review of the international literature was carried out by Carroll (1982). Thus, the literature review presented in the next section concentrates mostly on more recent studies, with an emphasis on the debates concerning the link between city-size distribution and economic growth. In the sections that follow, the methodology and data are presented, and the results are analysed and discussed. 
As a country of massive in-migration, the population of Israel has grown more than six-fold since independence in 1948 (Israel, CBS, 1996). Many of the immigrants were sent to settle in new towns built in the peripheral areas. Bell (1962) and Shachar (1970) have shown that during the decades of the 1950s and 1960s, strong and explicit government policies favouring population dispersion in the new towns were effective in straightening the curves associated with city-size distributions. Similar evidence led Vining (1986) to classify Israel as an anomalous country wherein dispersion of population is achieved in an early stage of the rapidly growing industrial economy. 
In later decades, population dispersal policies were pursued with diminished vigour (Kipnis, 1990), a factor which unleashed the search by firms and individuals for agglomeration externalities and economies of scale. These forces may have led to population concentration in and around larger urban centres and to the reversal of previous trends (Lipshitz, 1996). During the period 1950-95, the economic situation in Israel improved dramatically: total GDP (in constant prices) multiplied by 18.5, and per capita GDP by 4.7 (Israel, CBS, 1996). The question of the relationship between economic growth and city-size distribution has been debated in the geography and economic development literature. Some of these debates are presented in the following discussion. 
Following a comparative cross-country study, Berry (1961, p. 585) concluded that “different city-size distributions are in no way related to the relative economic development of the countries”. At the other extreme, Alperovich (1993, p. 1591), using cross-country data, found that “high degrees of economic development as measured by per capita GNP foster urban dispersal” (measured by the Pareto exponent). The role of primacy in economic development seems to reflect the same debate. While Mera (1973) found a significant positive association between GDP per capita growth rates and increasing primacy, Richardson and Schwartz (1988) found no statistically significant links. 
Parr (1985), following examination of several longitudinal studies, suggested resolving the conflicting findings by advancing the hypothesis of U-shaped relationships between city-size distribution and economic development over time. Alperovich (1992) has tested this hypothesis for Israel in a longitudinal study for the years 1922±83 using city-proper data. He verified the U-shape relationship for Israel and stated that 
at initial phases of development, with increasing per capita GNP, population becomes more concentrated, but as a certain level of development is passed, further economic growth leads to population dispersal (Alperovich, 1992, p. 71). 
The dates Alperovich detected as turning-points from concentration to dispersion vary according to the version of the model used and were “found to be either around 1950 or between 1961 and 1966” (p. 72). 
Parr (1985) warns, however, that when city-proper data are used, at least part of the increase in the a values (indicating dispersal in Pareto distributions) must be due to the suburbanisation of population in the larger cities. The failure to consider population within metropolitan area boundaries was a major point of criticism directed by Reichman (1972) towards the results obtained by Shachar (1970), indicating population dispersal to the peripheral areas of Israel at an early stage of economic development. Champion (1988, p. 254) also considers a the definitions of the core regionso to be “the weakest element” in the study of Cochrane and Vining (1988) on trends of migration between core and peripheral regions. 
Another issue debated in the literature is the level of economic development at which the turning-point from concentration to dispersion can be expected. Wheaton and Shishido (1981, p. 29) concluded that 
urban concentration must increase with the level of development, until the latter approaches $2,000 (per capita). After that, spatial decentralization will begin. 
This level of economic development as an indicator of the turning-point was examined recently by MacKellar and Vining (1995) in a range of developing countries. They concluded that in most instances the transition from concentration to dispersion occurs at a later stage of development. According to Alperovich (1992), the level of economic development reached in Israel at the turning-point to dispersion was calculated to range between $1500 and $3200 GNP per capita, depending on model specifications. This evidence suggests that the turning-point has been realised as the country moved from a low to a middle level of development. 
These debates and findings serve as a background for this study, which attempts to re-examine the longitudinal city-size distribution trends for Israel using statistics for metropolitan areas. The H0 hypothesis states that, when such boundaries are considered, the exponential parameter measuring city-size distribution in Israel is about stable. If stability is proved, it means that, despite the rapid economic development of the country, the distribution of population among the cities remained unchanged. This hypothesis does not pretend to formulate a general rule. It is simply based on the assumption that the specific conditions of Israel have not yet allowed the population dispersal which supposedly should accompany high levels of economic development. The stability hypothesis will not be accepted before examining the alternative H1 hypothesis searching for a turning-point in the exponential parameter of the city-size distribution. 
The specific conditions which seem to shape population distribution throughout the national system of cities in Israel are related to historical heritage (Efrat, 1984), international migration (Lipshitz, 1991a), government policies (Shachar, 1971) and changing economic conditions (Alperovich, 1992; Gradus, et al., 1993). In 1948, Israel inherited a polarised system of cities with two or three larger urban centres and many small ones, most of them formerly established as agricultural communities. During the early decades of statehood, a rigorous population dispersal policy was applied and newcomers to the country were sent to newly established towns in the northern and southern parts of the country (Shachar, 1970, 1971; Brutzkus, 1975). This laid down the cornerstone for the current urban system. 
Waves of immigrants arriving to the country in later decades confronted this system of cities. However, government incentives offered to firms and individuals were not discriminating enough to generate sustainable growth in the peripheral areas of the country. Insufficient incentives led to high unemployment rates and massive streams of out-migration moving from the periphery to the suburbs of the metropolitan centres (Lipshitz, 1991a, 1996). Thus, weakened dispersal policies could not counterbalance the economies of scale and agglomeration offered by the large urban concentrations. These contradictory trends seem to annul each other. Thus, they provide the base for the proposed hypothesis of relative stability in the pattern of the Israeli system of cities. It should be noted, however, that the reasoning given to the H0 hypothesis is based on the trends prevailing in Israel as reflected in the literature and no attempt is made to deal with general explanatory variables. 
Several formulations have been proposed to estimate city-size distributions (Richardson, 1973; Carroll, 1982). Geographers seem to prefer the rank-size distribution (see for example, Malecki, 1980; Danta, 1987; Fan, 1988) of the form presented in equation (1): 
where, Pr is the population of city ranked r, 
P1 is the population of the largest urban agglomeration, r is the rank order of the city in question, and q is the exponent of the rank-size distribution affecting its slope. 
When q equals -1, the equation follows the rank-size rule suggested by Zipf (1949) as the ideal city-size distribution. Values of q increasingly smaller then -1 represent the concentration of population in large urban centres, while values increasingly larger than -1 represent dispersion of population in small and medium-sized urban centres. Equation (1) is usually estimated in its logarithmic form as in (2): 
Economists seem to prefer the Pareto formulation originally proposed for income distributions (see for example, Rosen and Resnick, 1980; Alperovich, 1992, 1993). Parr (1985, p. 201) showed, however, that a the two forms are merely different presentations of the same distributiono and that “the rank-size form is typically employed when data are available on individual cities”. Both formulations yield very high fits with R2s mostly above 0.90, and their slope coefficients are considered to be ideal measurements of the form of city-size distributions. 
In this study, the q coefficient will be estimated and compared for several years between 1948 and 1995, both individually for each year, and then in a one stage spatio-temporal estimation model embracing all cities and all time-periods. The first method is employed in order to test the H0 stability hypothesis. The second method is used in order to test the alternative H1 hypothesis of the existence of a turning-point in the city-size distribution over time. For this purpose, the parameters of the size factor, and of the slope factor, q are expanded and made functions of another two variables, each one separately. The first expansion domain is time t as presented in equations (3) and (4), respectively (see Casetti, 1972). The other expansion variable is GDP per capita which is treated the same way as t in equations (3) and (4). 
The reason for applying both time and GDP per capita as expansion variables is that time is a straightforward extension of the analysis of individual years reported below in Table 1 and Figures 1-4. Furthermore, time represents an unbiased and undisturbed sequence. The GDP per capita variable is less accurate as a measure of change in the long run, since its values, measured in US dollars, are affected by government manipulations of the exchange rate rather than by free market conditions. Nonetheless, GDP per capita (GDPPC) is selected in order to test the turning-point hypothesis in relation to the level of economic development. This variable will assist not only the calculation of the economic level achieved at the turning-point, but also the comparison of the findings of this study with those of earlier studies (Wheaton and Shishido, 1981; Alperovich, 1992; Vining and MacKellar, 1995). 
Inserting (3) and (4) into (2) yields equation (5) to be estimated in a one stage procedure of a regression model. (For estimation of the equation in the per capita GDP domain, replace all t’s by GDP per capita.) 
The expanded city-size distribution by t or by GDP per capita enables testing the turning-point hypothesis in the following way. In case all values of t’s or GDP per capita are insignificantly different from zero, it means that both the size factor and the slope factor q are invariant through time or across the domain of growth in GDP per capita. Statistically significant results of the linear component (t) or GDP per capita mean that either the size parameter lnP1 and/or the slope exponent q, are either growing or declining through time or over the GDP per capita domain with no turning-point. The quadratic components or GDP per capita indicate the existence of a turning-point to be derived using the estimated parameters. More complex relationships (for example, one that is represented by a cubic term) are unexpected in the case of Israel due to the relatively short time frame covered by this study. Such a hypothesis was suggested and tested recently by Geyer and Kontuly (1993) for France, Korea and India. 
Once the parameters of equation (5) are estimated, this equation can be used to calculate the estimated size of each urban centre by its rank and at any point in time or level of GDP per capita. Furthermore, if the coefficients of the quadratic terms in the equation are found to be significantly different from zero, the timing of the turning-point and its dollar value can be derived (Danta, 1987). 
The Israeli Central Bureau of Statistics (ICBS) collects and publishes annual vital statistics for every urban municipality in Israel. The total number of inhabitants for each urban place is available annually since 1948. Changes in the number of inhabitants, and as a result changes in the city-size distribution, are continuous and slow. Thus, observations for six years only were considered, one for every decade, with preference for census statistics. The GDP per capita statistics are also published on a regular basis by the ICBS. However, for an inflation-ridden country, the annual summation of the monetary streams of production is not an easy task. Furthermore, the translation of the local currency into US dollars depends on frequently changing exchange rates that are periodically controlled by governmental decisions. 
Urban places included in the study are all Jewish cities and towns comprising 5000 inhabitants and over. The deletion of smaller urban places may have an impact on the magnitude of the rank-size coefficients (Malecki, 1980). However, as a longitudinal study, comparisons in time are valid as long as the same cut-off point is used. Only Jewish towns were selected since the developmental forces and processes leading to population growth in the non-Jewish urban places differ greatly from those pertaining to the Jewish urban system (Lipshitz, 1991b). Incorporation of cities of both population groups in the same model requires special methodological treatment and justifies a separate study. 
The Israeli CBS delineated the two metropolitan areas of Tel-Aviv and Haifa as early as 1961. Prior to undertaking the next two censuses in 1972 and 1983, the metropolitan boundaries were expanded to include more municipal entities, a result of the need to readjust the boundaries to evolving economic realities. The metropolitan boundaries of 1983 were used for 1995 since the demarcation of new metropolitan boundaries for the 1990s awaits the returns from the national population and housing census undertaken in 1995 (Razin, 1996). In this study, the populations of all municipalities belonging to a metropolitan area were summed-up and taken as one urban agglomeration. However, the data analysis was performed twice, first with fixed 1972 metropolitan boundaries, and then with varying metropolitan boundaries as defined and redefined for each subsequent decade. The estimates arrived at in the case of the fixed boundaries serve as a reference for those of the varying boundaries (see Fan, 1988). The results of the two analyses are presented in the following section. The raw data are presented graphically for fixed metropolitan boundaries (see Figure 1) and for varying metropolitan boundaries (Figure 2). Figure 1 portrays breakpoints of the curves between the third- and the fourth-largest cities. These breakpoints seem to indicate that, when metropolitan boundaries are used, the three larger urban units still constitute a separate group of cities. The raw data presentation also reveals the almost parallel slopes of the curves in the case of fixed boundaries and the intermingling of the lower part of the curves in the case of the varying boundaries. This difference will be addressed and presented more clearly in the next section. 
The regression results obtained independently for each of the six years included in the study are presented in Table 1 and Figures 3 and 4. These results were obtained by applying equation (2) to both sets of data, fixed and varying metropolitan boundaries. When fixed boundaries are used, the rank± size exponent q received a value of -1.86 
for the early year of 1948, representing a steep slope and a high concentration of population in the cities located in places defined in later decades as metropolitan areas. However, values of q for the next five readings, between 1953 and 1995, portray a strong stability with very low variance around an average value of -1.35. This is reflected in the almost parallel regression lines appearing in Figure 3. 
Quite different results were obtained when changes in metropolitan boundaries were taken into account. Not surprisingly, the slope exponent q for 1948 is not as steep as in the previous analysis since each urban unit is taken independently. However, the change in the initial five years, from 1948 to 1953 is remarkable, when the slope exponent has been reduced in its absolute value to a figure as low as 2 1.08. From 1961, when metropolitan boundaries were first introduced, the absolute value of q started to grow, reaching the highest absolute value of 2 1.43 in 1983 and then showing a minor absolute decline to -1.41 in 1995. Despite the observed changes in the value of q, the standard deviation around the average is no more than 10 per cent. 
Thus, the analysis of city-size distributions with expanding metropolitan boundaries seems to suggest that since 1953 the population has been getting increasingly more and more concentrated in the metropolitan areas with no more than a hint of a turning-point near 1995. This finding is also reflected in Figure 4, where the intercept points representing the larger urban concentrations are rising steadily, while the lower ends of the curves, even that of 1995, are reaching about 
the same position. Thus, while the fixed-boundary analysis points towards stability in city-size distribution, the varying-boundary case may suggest a different conclusion. 
The trends of change over time revealed by the analysis of the individual years, were further tested for statistical validation of the turning-point hypothesis and its timing. This was performed by expanding the variables and q of equation (2) and making them functions of either time t (measured in decades) or change in per capita GDP (since 1950). Each of these expansions was tested in a one stage estimation procedure (equation 5) using pooled data for all cities at all time-periods. The results of these analyses are reported in Table 2. 
In the case of the fixed boundary models, the suggested expansion of either by t or by GDP per capita (in its linear as well as quadratic form) turned out to be insignificant. Evidently, for the fixed-boundary case, the slope q of is statistically invariant over time or across the domain of the per capita GDP. It is only the size factor that is growing through time, though at a decreasing rate. 
In the case of the varying metropolitan boundaries, both interaction terms of with time t and GDP per capita are significantly associated with both the size factor and the slope factor, suggesting that both factors vary over time or with growth in per capita GDP. The size factor varies in the same direction as in the case of the fixed boundaries over time. The slope factor is also getting steeper, as indicated by the negative sign of the coefficient of the linear components (or). However, the steepness of the slope is growing at a decelerating rate, as indicated by the positive sign of the coefficients of the quadratic components (or). This result suggests the existence of a turning-point at a certain date in time and at a certain level of GDP per capita. 
In order to find out whether the turning-point has been arrived at during the period under study, the coefficients q of from Table 2 were inserted into equation (4) and differentiated with respect to time and GDP per capita as follows: 
Setting equations (7) and (9) to zero, they yield and GDP per capita, respectively. These results indicate that the turning-point had not been reached by 1993, after about 4.5 decades of national development since independence in 1948, and not before the per capita GDP had multiplied by 4.58 since 1950. At the initial year of 1950, per capita GDP (in constant prices of 1990) amounted to about $2700 per annum. GDP per capita did not reach $12 366 until 1994. Thus, both expansion indicators show that the turning-point of the city-size distribution in Israel from concentration to dispersion was reached in 1993 or 1994 and it occurred when the level of per capita GDP was much higher than anticipated by previous studies. 
The dependency of the city-size distribution parameters on the way large urban agglomerations are defined has been emphasised in many studies (Reichman, 1972; Parr, 1985). This study re-examines longitudinal city-size distributions in Israel employing aggregate population statistics of the cities and towns belonging to the sphere of influence of Tel-Aviv and Haifa, Israel’ s two metropolitan areas. Consequently, the results obtained in this study do not replicate previous findings that pointed towards population dispersal to small and medium-sized cities at relatively early stages of development. On the contrary, if metropolitan boundaries are held constant, the distribution is remarkably stable, and the only systematic change observed is a proportional growth of the entire system of cities (Figure 3). 
For fixed-boundary analysis, the results obtained using per capita GDP reproduce the same stable city-size distribution as that reached using time. This finding does not support the hypothesis that economic development leads to population dispersal. On the contrary, population tends to grow at about equal rates within territorially defined boundaries. This finding strengthens Berry’ s (1961) conclusion that city-size distribution is unrelated to the economic development of the country. 
The analysis performed with varying metropolitan boundaries seems to point towards the hypothesis advanced by Parr suggesting the existence of a turning-point. This hypothesis implies that initial stages of economic development lead to population concentration, and that the change to population dispersal occurs at later stages (Parr, 1985). However, from the sample of countries summarised by Parr, as well as from the results obtained by Wheaton and Shishido (1981) for a cross-country analysis, Danta (1987) for Hungary and Alperovich (1992) for Israel, it seems that the turning-point from population concentration to dispersion takes place when a country moves from low to intermediate levels of economic development. In this study, the turning-point was calculated to occur in either 1993 or 1994. At this time, per capita GDP in Israel was about US$12 370. This value is way beyond the per capita GDP reported for the countries mentioned in the previous studies at their turn-around stage. 
The timing of the turning-point of the city-size distribution in Israel raises questions concerning its relation to the concurrent massive flow of immigrants arriving in the country between 1990 and 1995. During this period, more than half a million immigrants came to Israel, mainly from the former USSR and Ethiopia. The distribution of these immigrants, in and of itself, may have changed the city-size distribution and caused higher population growth rates in smaller urban units outside the metropolitan boundaries (Hasson, 1993). 
The hypothesised effect of the 1995 population redistribution was tested by applying equation (5) to a truncated data set which did not include the last year’s statistics. The components of the equation that were significantly different from zero are reported in equation (10) (R2  = 0.95; all coefficients are significant at least at the 0.0001 level). 
According to this equation, is only linearly associated with time, while the quadratic temporal relationship responsible for the turning-point did not enter the equation. Furthermore, the negative sign of indicates that until the 1980s the slope of the city-size distribution became increasingly steeper, pointing towards a continuation of the trend of population concentration in large urban centres. The turn to dispersion identified in equations (7)-(9) was probably highly affected by the population redistribution that followed the sudden exogenous demographic change induced by the large number of immigrants arriving in the country. 
These results cast doubts on the exact timing of the identified turning-point. In case the hypothesised relationships between the turning-point and immigration to Israel are confirmed, there will be a need to examine carefully the internal migration patterns of these newcomers. It may well be that following the initial settlement of the immigrants, with a relatively high proportion taking place outside the metropolitan areas, they adopted the internal migration patterns of the veterans and joined the stream of those moving towards the core urban centres (Lipshitz, 1997). If this is the case, the turning-point should be dated at the beginning of the 1990s. Moreover, if this hypothesis is validated, then the identified turning-point is no more than a short lived temporary episode in the long-range trend of population concentration. This may lead to the conclusion that the anticipated historic turning-point from concentration to dispersion is an event which has not yet been realised in the Israeli urban system. 
Before concluding it should be emphasised that the findings concerning the stable city-size distribution, or at least the relatively high economic level found for the turning-point, are derived from data pertaining to a single and unique country. It is not only the small size of the country in terms of land area and population, but mainly its being a country of mass immigration (relatively to its size), and a land where the strong population dispersal policies of the 1950s and 1960s have gradually faded away in the recent decades. Berry (1961) observed that a large land area may account for population dispersal at earlier stages of economic development. Total population was found to be negatively correlated with population concentration by Rosen and Resnick (1980) and by Richardson and Schwartz (1988). The latter study, drawing upon a sample of 116 nations, concluded that “demography may be more important than economics in attempts to explain primacy” (Richardson and Schwartz, 1988, p. 474). This longitudinal study of Israel seems to confirm their findings with regard to a single small country in which population remained concentrated despite economic development. It seems that, in a small country, the economies to scale and agglomeration reached in one or two major urban concentrations may overshadow any other advantages available in nearby peripheries. 
The small population size is, however, not the sole demographic factor affecting population distribution in Israel. The case of Israel highlights a new factor that of mass immigration. When this factor was coupled with a strong population dispersal policy in the period of early statehood between 1948 and 1953, the parameter of population concentration q fell drastically from 1.86 to 1.40 or 1.34 to 1.08 (see Table 1). The turning-point identified for 1995 is much less in magnitude - probably because the ratio of immigrants to the veteran population was smaller than in the 1950s, and because government dispersal policies have gradually waned. Of note here is Parr’ s (1985, p. 209) observation that “policies designed to foster deconcentration have typically had only a marginal effect”. 
A final note should be made with regard to possible short term fluctuations. It is obvious that thef lattening of the city-size distribution curve of the 1950s was a short-term episode despite heavy government involvement. There are initial indications (Lipshitz, 1997) that the recent turning-point may not be more than a temporary twist in the long-run stable structure. The exploration of this option for any given country requires the examination of annual changes in city-size distributions and cannot rely on large interval data. This prospect renders a re-examination of evidence collected by previous studies with regard to possible relationships between short-term and long-term  fluctuations in population concentration and dispersion (Vining, 1986; Geyer and Kontuly, 1993; MacKellar and Vining, 1995) 
Previous studies of city-size distribution in Israel, carried out by Bell (1962), Shachar (1970), and Alperovich (1992), utilised the population of individual cities within municipal boundaries. Their results seem to indicate that changes in city-size distribution through time reveal a trend to population dispersal occurring concurrently with the move from low to medium levels of economic development. This study re-examined their findings for six annual observations between 1948 and 1995, using population statistics for cities, and aggregating those cities contained in metropolitan areas. 
The results obtained in this study do not match previous findings. When metropolitan boundaries are held constant, city-size distribution seems to be in a stationary state. The rank-size exponent is nearly stable and the whole system of cities is growing proportionately. When metropolitan boundaries were allowed to change periodically, population continued to concentrate in the expanding metropolitan areas until the next decade, despite continued economic development. The turning-point to dispersion identified in the early 1990s seems to be associated with the redistribution of population that took place during the absorption of a massive wave of immigrants rather than with continued economic development. 
If the newly introduced trends of dispersion persist in the future, then the early 1990s will be identified as the historic turning-point from population concentration to dispersion. This occurred, however, not only at a much later date than prescribed by the literature, but also at a much higher level of economic development than anticipated by previous studies. If, however, Israeli newcomers adopt internal migration patterns characteristic of the veteran population, as indicated by recent studies (Hasson, 1993; Lipshitz, 1997), then the identified turning-point will not persist in the long run and the city-size distribution in Israel may return to a steady state and stability even when varying metropolitan boundaries are considered. Factors such as mass immigration may have a temporary short-term impact on population distribution. Studies using short interval data are needed in order to distinguish between short-term fluctuation and longer-term trends. 


