
The rank-size distribution has been the subject of one of the most long-term research efforts in urban geography, dating back at least to Auerbach (1913). Theoretical approaches to city-size distributions have progressed considerably, and provide a large variety of alternative models which can generate plausible size distributions (Richardson, 1973). There has even been a recent resurgence of in the theoretical aspects of such distributions (Beguin, 1979; Mulligan, 1979; Okabe, 1977). However, as Richardson notes (1973, page 239), "it is difficult to sort out 'good' theories from 'bad' via empirical testing". This is especially true in the light of the empirical analyses which have been undertaken. In particular, rank-size studies have examined various urban systems with different-size cutoff points, usually with an at least implicit comparison with the most restrictive rank-size
'rule' (Vining, 1977). Thus the empirical record on city-size distributions generally has been biased towards large cities. For recent reviews, see Dziewonski (1972), Malecki (1975), and Vining (1977). 
Of more recent vintage is the literature on urban growth and its relation to city size (Cliff and Robson, 1978; Marshall and Smith, 1978; Robson, 1973; Vining, 1977). Despite the parallel focus and similar concern, the theoretical and empirical analyses of urban growth rates have tended to remain somewhat removed from the empirical work on city-size distributions. For example, explicit relationships between city growth and rank-size distributions are rarely drawn, and the analysis of growth or change in such distributions has not been common. 
This paper addresses, from a purely empirical standpoint, both the analysis of rank-size systems and the question of urban growth in such systems. Related issues of national urban systems and population distribution, of considerable interest in policy and planning, are outside the immediate scope of this paper. Concern with city size and size distributions has been evident largely in eastern Europe (Dziewonski and Jerczynski, 1976; 1978; Fomin, 1976; Khodzhaev and Khorev, 1973), but general interest in these issues is also found recently in market economies (Bourne, 1975; Johnston, 1976; Thompson, 1972). 
Given the empirical focus of this paper, the analytical efforts may at least serve to suggest some of the things we know and do not know about rank-size analysis. The paper first examines the effect of variations in the minimum or threshold settlement size on urban system structure for rank-size analyses. Second, it presents empirical evidence concerning urban growth rates and their relation to rank-size distributions, particularly changes in those distributions over time. The urban system of the American Midwest is the empirical case for analysis. 
The settlement population data utilized in this paper consist of all incorporated places in the American Midwest for the years 1940, 1950, 1960, and 1970. (The states are North Dakota, South Dakota, Nebraska, Kansas, Missouri, Iowa, Minnesota, Wisconsin, Illinois, and the northwestern portion of Indiana. The number of settlements ranges from 5635 in 1940 to 5874 in 1970.) Urbanized area populations were used for large cities and therefore included population in unincorporated areas and suburbs when so defined by the US Census. Further, several smaller twin cities and clusters of towns were combined on the basis of proximity, even when separated by state boundaries. Data on small unincorporated settlements are not available, which leaves small towns relatively underrepresented in comparison with these larger urban areas. This is a particular problem for settlements with populations below 100, where census data tend to be less complete. The data set for this Chicago-based Midwest region, by its inclusion of even very small places, would seem to meet the criteria for a regional settlement suggested by Dziewonski, who asserts that studies of only a few large cities "show a complete misunderstanding of what rank-size distributions really are" (Dziewonski, 1972, page 78). The use of a minimum size of one also means that town 'births' and 'deaths' can be analyzed at that or any higher population level. 
The sensitivity of rank-size coefficients to threshold size is rather a mystery. Despite Dziewonski's concern, most empirical work on city-size distributions has analyzed sets of cities with populations greater than 1000, 5000, 10000, or even 100000. In most instances, data limitations have constrained the perspective. In any case little is known about how rank-size parameters respond to changes in the threshold size employed. By use of the rank-size distribution, 
where Pt is the population (size) of settlement /, Rt is the rank of settlement /, and C and q are parameters, in its logarithmic form,
table 1 presents estimated values of the intercept and slope (q) of rank-size distributions of the Midwest urban system in 1970 at threshold sizes of one through 100000 (using natural logarithmic transformations). 
A number of observations can be made about table 1. First, the level of explained variance (R) is lowest when the entire system is used; any subset fits the rank-size form more closely . This is most likely to be attributable to the tendency for the rank-size representation of an entire settlement system to be appropriate only to some minimum size and to be concave to the origin below that size (Parr, 1976; Parr and Suzuki, 1973). In this case, concavity can be partially attributed to utilizing data only for incorporated places, an unknown number of mostly small unincorporated places being omitted from the study. Second, the slope parameter, q, appears to be fairly stable between 1.07 and 1.10 for systems with threshold populations between 500 and 5000. When only places with populations larger than 10000 are considered, q increases steadily up to 1.2999 for the system with a threshold of 100000. Likewise the intercept, InC, remains stable near 15.0 for systems with thresholds between 500 and 5000, but then increases to 15.55 when only the largest twenty-five places are used. (The natural logarithm of Chicago's actual 1970 population is 15.72.) Last, the estimates provided by the urban systems with low threshold populations tend to be better than for the smaller sets of larger cities. Standard errors for all q coefficients below the 10000 population threshold are less than 1.5% of the coefficient value, but the relative size of the standard error increases considerably as the number of cities decreases. The onset of concavity appears to be at or near the 500 population threshold, below which unincorporated settlements are a significant part of the settlement system. This is also related to 'swarming' in the lower part of the logarithmic rank-size curve, which also tends to keep R values artificially high (Parr, 1976). The R values, however, do not reveal as much variation as the standard errors.
This examination of threshold size in rank-size analyses has implications for the study of rank-size distributions. For example, attempts to fit a rank-size curve to a small set of large cities, such as those with population of 10000 or more, would result in a considerably different characterization of the urban system than would analyses on a larger set that included smaller places. The intercept value estimates fairly accurately the size of the largest city only in equations with thresholds of either 100000 or between 100 and 250. For cities with populations above 500, the high R misleading in their predictive accuracy since the intercept values estimate large-city populations poorly. Cutoff points more common in empirical studies, such as 1000, 5000, or 10000, provide substantial error in this analysis. The point seems clear, as Dziewonski suggests, that the rank-size description of a settlement system depends critically on the elements included in that system, as determined by the threshold size. 
Growth is an aspect of urban systems that until recently remained largely outside the study of city-size distributions. With few exceptions empirical work on size distributions has been comparative, both regionally and temporally, frequently with the aim of learning about urban systems during the course of economic development (Lasuen et al, 1967; Vapnarsky, 1969). Studies of urban growth, on the other hand, have taken a long-term look at growth rates with city size (Marshall and Smith, 1978; Robson, 1973). The principal integrating work in an empirical context has been that of Vining (1977), who has demonstrated that the rank-size distribution is determined by the ratio of the rate of growth in the size of cities to the rate of growth in the number of cities. [Earlier related works which note or assume this relationship include Fuguitt (1965), Simon (1957), and Ward (1963).] Vining's contribution will be briefly summarized, followed by the empirical examination of growth rates in the urban" system of the American Midwest. 
Vining (1977), following Steindl (1965), provides a rationale for the correspondence between growth in an urban system and its rank-size characteristics. In a growing urban system, cities are continually 'born' or attain some minimum size at a rate of birth r, and grow in size at a constant rate g. In such a system the age of a city determines its size and, because all cities grow at rate g, the number of cities existent at the birth of a city is its rank. The ratio approximates the value q in the rank-size distribution. In a balanced expansion of an urban system the rate of growth of new cities, g, will be equal to r, the rate of births, and their ratio will be one, the value of the ideal rank-size coefficient q (Zipf, 1949). 
This hypothesis merits further testing, particularly to determine the sensitivity of g, r, and q to variations in the definition of an urban system. The data from 1940 and 1970 were used to compare ratios for the Midwest settlement system. The rate of population growth g is defined as 
where Pt is the population of place, n is the number of towns above a threshold size, and. Thus only towns which existed in 1940 are considered in the rate of population growth. The rate of growth of the urban system in terms of new cities or 'births', r, is defined as 
Table 2 shows the components of g and r in the Midwest urban system in 1940 and 1970 and the resultant g/r ratio for the set of thresholds used in the previous section. The calculated ratio is extremely sensitive to the threshold value for the urban system, and varies considerably from the expected value of one except for the system with threshold of 75000. In general the growth rate of cities far exceeds the rate of expansion in terms of new cities below the 75000 level, where urban population growth surpasses the birth rate of cities. In comparing the trend in the values of (table 2) with that of q (table 1) it is apparent that stability in the ratio of growth rates is affected very differently by threshold size. The ratio continues to fall as fewer and larger cities are included, and the value is near one only for an urban system of only larger cities. The rank-size coefficients, q and InC, by contrast, are most stable for urban systems with a greater number of smaller places. 
This empirical look at the validity of the Vining-Steindl approach suggests that, although it may be applicable to large cities [the evidence presented by Vining (1977, page 20) was from data for metropolitan areas with populations greater than 50000], it becomes increasingly less appropriate for urban systems defined to include smaller places which tend to have lower rates of 'births' than larger places. It also is interesting to compare the rank-size slopes and the growth-rate ratios with the expectations of the rank-size 'rule'. Both measures vary considerably from the value of one and they vary with threshold size in very different manners. The growth-rate ratio appears to deviate considerably from the rank-size stability in urban systems with thresholds below 2500 or 25000, depending on the degree of deviation one is willing to accept. 
The relationship between urban growth rates and the rank-size distribution can also take on a characteristic variation with city size. Robson (1973, pages 71-89), in a study of urban growth in England and Wales from 1801 to 1911, concluded that the variance in growth rates is inversely related to town population, even if the mean growth rate is constant. Recently Marshall and Smith (1978, pages 27-30) found a marked inconsistency in the relationship between city size and variability in growth rates in southern Ontario from 1851-1971. This paper adds another case to these two in an effort to associate trends in urban growth rates to changes in rank-size parameters. 
The logarithms of 1940-1970 growth rates were plotted against the logarithms of 1940 populations to eliminate the usual skewness in distributions with city size. The thirty-year period was used to avoid the decennial fluctuations and to concentrate on long-term growth trends. Figure 1 shows the generalized scatter plot of growth rates of the 5483 places in the Midwest settlement system that existed in 1940 and 1970. The scatter is similar to that found by Robson (1973) for England and Wales, in that there is less variance in the growth rates of larger cities. However, by including small towns, figure 1 shows that the variance in growth rates does not become uniformly larger as town size gets smaller. Table 3 indicates that the mean growth rate tends to increase steadily as town-size categories increase, with the exception of the smallest and largest size categories. Further, the standard deviation in the growth rates is highest among the smallest city sizes, especially for those below 1000 in population. With the exception of the smaller categories of city sizes (100-2500 in population), there is no consistent pattern of variation in growth rates with city size. This would seem to concur with the findings of Robson in terms of broad trends in growth-rate variability, and with those of Marshall and Smith in comparing some pairs of size groups (for example, those above 25000). 
Vining (1977, page 21) suggests that in a stationary or nongrowing urban system the parameter, q, of the city-size distribution is directly proportional to the variance in city growth rates. A comparison of the mean growth rates for the city-size categories and the variation in q with threshold size indicates little or no correspondence between the two. Values of q are lowest in the 100-5000 threshold population range, whereas the variance in growth rates generally is lowest in the 2500-10000 and the above 100000 population ranges. Consideration of cumulative growth rates for all towns above a threshold size (rather than for a size category) shows some similarity to the pattern of q, in that the minima are in the 2500-5000 population category, but the degree of similarity appears to be slight. This would suggest that q is not related to the variability in the growth rate in a growing urban system such as that in the American Midwest during this period (Vining, 1977). However, recall that q also does not appear to correspond to the ratio of growth rates, as it was expected to do in a system undergoing such growth. The relatively short thirty-year period analyzed may not be the ideal test of Vining's hypotheses regarding urban growth, but the results suggest that the correspondence between urban growth rates and rank-size coefficients as a general phenomenon is open to serious question. 
A final measurement of the growth of the Midwest urban system takes the form of examining shifts in the parameters of the rank-size distribution. Urban growth that takes place in different-size towns will affect the rank-size structure of an urban system, causing changes in the intercept, or in the slope, q, or in both parameters. Most research on changes in rank-size systems of cities takes a comparative static approach between two or more points in time, noting changes in the intercept or slope values, and including some observations on relative growth rates of large and small cities (Davies, 1972; Lasuen et al, 1967; Vapnarsky, 1969). The Midwest urban system was analyzed in this manner and the results are given in table 4, again employing a natural logarithmic transformation. Threshold size was varied as before in order to establish whether this had a consistent influence on the temporal trends. 
The intercept tends to increase steadily over time for each threshold size, reflecting the increasing size of the largest cities. The slope also increases over time for urban systems with threshold population of 25000 and below. When the threshold is 50000 or larger, the change in q is in the opposite direction, as suggested previously by the trends in. Clearly quite different conclusions are suggested by analyzing only large cities or both large and small cities in this urban system. Growth among cities in the 50000-100000 population range is combined with large-city growth when smaller towns are included, but cities in that range are relatively small when the threshold is 50000. 
The significance of changes both in the intercept and slope may be tested by expanding the parameters and as functions of time (Casetti, 1972; Malecki, 1975). The number of time periods (four) was considered to be too small to analyze nonlinear trends so a linear function of time was used. A linear function expands the intercept to 
where t is time. Likewise q is expanded to 
The logarithmic rank-size model becomes 
Thus changes over time in the intercept are indicated by and in the slope by qx in equation (7). 
An urban system in which all places have grown significantly at the same rate over time is indicated by a statistically significant positive value of and a value of qx not significantly different from zero. If and qx are positive and significant, then the urban system is characterized by larger places growing relatively faster than smaller towns (Malecki, 1975). Although some information from comparative static analysis is lost, the significant long-term trends are identified and emphasized. 
Table 5 shows the results of estimating the parameters of equation (7) for each of the urban systems. The values of and qx allow an examination of the temporal trend in the rank-size distribution. The most interesting trends again relate to the threshold population. The urban system with threshold one is unlike those urban systems that exclude small places. The reason is clear from the Midwest rank-size distribution in 1940 and 1970 (figure 2), which exhibits a sharp nonlinearity for populations below 500. This is consistent with evidence of concavity rather than strict linearity at the lower end of rank-size distributions (Parr, 1976; Parr and Suzuki, 1973). The intercept increases by about 0-25 each decade and the slope increases by about 0-025 for thresholds of 500, 1000, and 2500. The 10000 population threshold is a turning point for this urban system. The temporal trend is for the intercept to be fairly stable for thresholds up to and including 10000. The intercepts (lnC0) increase considerably with thresholds above that size, but less so over time, as indicated by the variation in Cx. The slope (q) becomes markedly steeper as the threshold population increases above 10000. The temporal trend is for the slope also to become somewhat steeper with time by over 5% for the thirty-year period. For those urban systems with low threshold populations, and therefore many small towns, the largest growth over the period seems to have been among large cities. This growth has increased both the intercept and the slope significantly from 1940 to 1970. 
This trend is reversed as one looks at urban systems that include only the larger cities. The intercepts still increase over time, but at a slower rate than when small cities are included. The slopes flatten increasingly as the threshold increases and the urban system is restricted to a smaller number of large cities. These trends, like many others that can be detected in rank-size studies, are attributable primarily to the aggregation of different-size cities. The relatively fast growth of large cities vis-a-vis the largest is significant when only those cities with populations of over 50000 are analyzed. The positive values of q - seem to be similar to the change in to values less than one (table 2). This growth among a small number of large cities is over-whelmed by the opposite trend at the lower end of the distribution if the urban system is defined more broadly. The structure and change of subsets of the urban system (designated by threshold populations) provides important information as far as rank-size is concerned. 
The description of the rank-size structure of an urban system is not as straightforward as previous research would suggest. This structure depends largely on the definition of the system, as implied by the threshold size of cities included in the system. When all but the smallest settlements (below 500 in population) are included in the urban system of the American Midwest analyzed here, there is a clear trend both for the intercept and the slope of the estimated rank-size distribution to increase as the urban system is defined as smaller sets of larger cities. The predictive accuracy of the rank-size equation is highest at threshold populations of 100 and 250 rather than at the larger cutoffs common in empirical studies. 
The analysis of urban growth rates sheds light on the changes that take place in the rank-size structure of an urban system. The Midwest city system, although a growing one in terms of population, did not add new places at a high rate. The ratio of growth rates, then, can be misleading in its indication of the slope coefficient, q, for urban systems that include small places, although it may be applicable to urban systems of only large cities. The trends of average city growth rates and their variability also provide a few clues to the changes in the rank-size distribution. First, the average growth rate is highest for cities in the 50000-100000 population category, which corresponds to the apparent flattening in the rank-size curve over time for cities with populations above 50000. Second, the slope of the rank-size curve shows little relation to variations in growth-rate variability across city sizes, as was expected for a growing urban system. 
By analyzing change as an intrinsic part of a rank-size system, the growth-rate trends become more useful. A significant temporal trend in the intercept or slope of the distribution can be attributed to differential growth in different size categories of towns. The trend appears to be toward concavity of the rank-size distribution for the Midwest, with the slope among large cities becoming flatter and the slope for small towns becoming steeper. The benefit of observing the effect of different thresholds may in fact be to provide evidence for the possibility that the rank-size distribution has tended to become less appropriate over time for the Midwest as fewer new places have been 'born' over time. Although this empirical case alone is not sufficient evidence, concave urban-size distributions may be a common outcome of the growth and change in urban systems. Our traditional approaches for the analysis of urban systems, such as rank-size distributions, may be inappropriate for the study of these more complex distributions. 

