Since the early 1910s, considerable research effort has been focused on the study of a city size distribution in a country. As a result, several empirical ‘laws’ have been discovered such as the Auerbach’s law, rank-size rule, Pareto, and log-normal city size distributions. In examining these studies, one may notice that each ‘law’ has been studied in a certain depth separately, while little attention has been paid to the theoretical relationship between them. This relationship, however, might be quite important to obtain the comprehensive understanding of these empirical ‘laws’. To see this in an example, let us first observe figs. 1 and 2 comparatively. It is noted that these two figures are constructed from the 1970 census data” of 92 cities in the Hokkaido region. City size is defined by the number of inhabitants in the DID (Densely Inhabited District), and the 92 cities are ranked according to this city size. 
In fig. 1, the values of where P is the ranked r city size in the Hokkaido region, are plotted along the log r-axis. In the same figure, the linear equation, given by 
Which is estimated by the Ordinary Least Squares (OLS) method, is indicated by a straight line. Fig. 2 shows the city size histogram of the Hokkaido region with 10000 population unit interval. Also the Pareto city size distribution, given by
Is indicated by a continuous line. It should be noted again that these two figures are constructed from the same data. 
In observing fig. 1, one may come to the conclusion that the rank-size rule holds in the -Hokkaido region, because the 92 points are almost on the straight line given by eq. (1). In fact, the correlation coefficient of the observed data is -0.9963, and the F value is 11953.89, which is far above 3.95, the critical 5% point of the F distribution with (1,90) degrees of freedom. In fig. 2. on the other hand. one may question whether the data fits to the Pareto city size distribution. Usually this is tested by the goodness-of-fit method. Following this method, is calculated, where N, is the observed number of cities between and population, and n is its expected number, As a result, We obtain the value as 1251.646, which is far above 59.428, the critical 5% point of the distribution with 79 degrees of freedom. Hence one may conclude that the data does not fit to the Pareto city size distribution. 
A problem would arise when we find the statement in the literature saying that the rank-size rule and the Pareto city size distribution are equivalent. If this is true, the above conclusions appear to be contradictory, because the rank-size rule is accepted in fig. 1, while it is rejected in fig. 2. Motivated by this contradiction, this paper will investigate a theoretical relationship between the rank-size rule and city size distributions. Based on this examination, an alternative rank-size rule will be proposed. Moreover, an alternative statistical test will be proposed to dissolve the above contradiction. 
In the related literature, we can find at least two kinds of argument about the relationship between the rank-size rule and city size distributions. One argument is based on the empirical fact that the data which show a good fit to the log-normal distribution also fit to the rank-size rule. This empirical fact, however, does not provide an explicit theoretical relationship. Moreover, in the Hokkaido region case, the goodness-of-fit to the log-normal distribution is worse than that of the Pareto distribution. The other argument concerns the Pareto distribution. Since the cumulative distribution function (denoted by hereafter) of the Pareto distribution is given by
The cumulative distribution function above P (denoted by hereafter) is written as. Hence the relation, or
Holds, where and. Conventionally this relation is considered an alternative form of the rank-size rule. However, comparing eq. (4) with the rank-size rule equation
It may not be obvious that these two equations are equivalent. In particular, regarding as a rank is not always straightforward. 
As is seen in eq. (5) the rank-size rule is obtained from simple multiplication of city size and its rank. No probabilistic concept appears in the ranks size-rule. On the other hand, when city size is examined in terms of a city size distribution, a probabilistic concept appears. Hence, in order to relate a city size distribution to the rank-size rule, it would be necessary to understand the rank-size rule in a probabilistic context. Thus we shall first consider a probabilistic version of the rank-size rule. 
Suppose that at a certain point in time, there are n cities in a country, and that their city sizes (usually measured by their population) are observed as. Now we regard these observed values as those that appeared in the real world according to a certain city size distribution. To be more precise, our first assumption may be written as: 
Assumption 1. A set of observed values consists of n city size values which are randomly sampled according to the same city size distribution. 
Next n cities are ranked in decreasing order, i.e 
One would then examine the rank-size rule in terms of. However, under Assumption 1, we understand that the values, are probabilistic, Hence, in a theoretical context, it may be more appropriate to use the expected values 
than to use the specific values. Consequently the rank-size rule would be written as 
We shall call this relation an expected rank-size rule hereafter.
With the above understanding: we are now able to relate a certain city size distribution to the expected city size. To do so, let be a rank r city size probability density function (pdf), and. Then for a given city size distribution, the rank r city size pdf is obtained from
Hence the expected city size of rank r is given by
Therefore, if a certain city size distribution is given we can calculate the expected city size. In what follows, we shall examine the relationship between the rank-size rule and city size distributions by use of eq. (8). 
As was mentioned in section 2, the log-normal and Pareto city size distributions are referred to as the rank-size rule. In this section, we shall test whether or not these city size distributions satisfy the expected rank-size rule given by eq. (6). 
First, les us examine the log-normal city size distribution, given by
Substituting this into eq. (8), the expected city size of rank t would be obtained. However, the integrals in eq. (8) cannot be represented by elementary integrals. Hence a numerical analysis should be employed. As an example, the case of is calculated here, and the numerical result is shown in table 1. 
From this table, we realize that the log-normal city size distribution does not satisfy the expected rank-size rule.
Second, concerning the Pareto city size distribution given by eq. (3) or 
one would obtain, after a few steps of calculation, the expected city size of rank r as
It is easily seen from this equation that is not constant for. Summarizing the above two results, we may conclude that: 
Proposition 1. The log-normal and Pareto city size distributions do not satisfy the expected rank-size rule given by eq. (6). 
Having observed Proposition 1, our concern is now to ask for what form of city size distributions the expected rank-size rule holds. In mathematical terms, we wish to find city size distributions which satisfy the expected rank-size rule given by eq. (6) or 
Since the form of this equation is fairly complex in order to consider the above question, eq. (12) is transformed into a simpler form by the use of the following lemma: 
Lemma 1. Eq (12) holds if and only if the equation
Holds, where
And
Proof. By the use of the binomial expansion and integration by parts, the left-hand side of eq. (12) is written as 
[Recall that] Thus eq. (12) is equivalent to equation, where 
Since the determinant of matrix A is not zero, the inverse matrix A exists, and hence we obtain, which is alternatively written as eq. A12.
From Lemma 1, we realize that the problem raised above is now to find functions G(P) which satisfy eq. (13). Unfortunately we do not know the general solution of this integral equation. One may easily notice. however, that the solution exists and it is not unique for a given number of cities, n. 
To see this, let us first examine the simplest case. In this case, eq. (13) becomes 
As a concrete form of function, let us consider
Substituting this into eq. (14) and cancelling constant c, we obtain the equation 
This implies that for any function of eq. (15) with parameters and that satisfy eq. (16), eq. (14) holds, i.e., the expected rank size rule holds for. 
In a general case, n, if function is given by 
a similar argument could be employed, and one would realize that there exist functions that satisfy eq. (13). Therefore we may conclude that: 
Proposition 2. For a given number of cities n, there exist city size distributions which satisfy the expected rank-size rule given by eq. (6). Moreover, such city size distributions are net unique. 
Concerning this result, one should pay attention to the condition ‘for a given number of cities. To be more explicit, let, be the city size distribution which satisfies the expected rank-size rule given by eq. (6), provided that the number of cities is. It should then be noted that Proposition 2 does not guarantee that, has the same form as, if. In other words, Proposition 2 might imply that the expected rank-size rule holds when the number of cities takes on a specific number. However, we realize from the related empirical studies that a certain city size distribution holds for many countries regardless of the number of cities. This may implicitly imply that a form of city size distributions remains constant for countries although the scale of city size varies from country to country. With this in mind, the following assumption may be appropriate: 
Assumption 2. City size distributions are unique for countries up to a scale transformation.
Now, in order to take this assumption into account, a few more notions should be added here. First, let be ranked r city size given that the number of cities is n. Second, as a generalization of the expected rank-size rule given by eq. (6), and considering Assumption 2, let us formulate an expected rank-size rule given by 
where r is the minimum positive integer which makes positive. Function will be called a rank function which does not contain variable n, and constant is constant regardless of variable r. It should be noted that as a consequence of Assumption 2, we require that eq. (18) hold not only for but also for any number of cities. In this sense, the expected rank-size rule given by eq. (18) is stronger than that given by eq. (6). Thus the former will be referred to as 2 strong expected rank-size rule hereafter. 
With the above notions, we shall now investigate the relationship between the strong expected rank-size rule and city size distributions. First, the following lemma will be shown: 
Lemma 2. If there exist city size distributions which satisfy the strong expected rank-size rule with rank function, i.e., eq. (18), then rank function satisfies the following equation: 
Proof : From eq. (18), we obtain 
It is known in order statistics that for any distribution, the relation
For holds. Substituting eq. (20) into this, eq. (22) is written as
From eqs. (21) and (23), we obtain eq. (19), proving Lemma 2. 
This lemma is useful to test whether or not a given rank function satisfies the strong expected rank-size rule. In particular, the rank function is of our concern. Concerning this function, however, we come to the following negative conclusion: 
Theorem 1. The strong expected rank-size rule given by 
does not hold for any city size distributions.
Proof. Substituting into the left-hand side of eq. 9, we obtain 
While this value varies according to variable r, the right-hand side of eq. (19) is constant. Hence eq. (19) does not hold for. Thus the strong expected rank-size rule given by eq. (24) does not hold. Q.E.D. 
This result should not be confused with the result obtained in Proposition 2. We realize from Theorem 1 that Proposition 2 implies that there exist city size distributions that satisfy the expected rank-size rule given by eq. (6) only when the number of cities takes a specific number. Except for this number of cities, the expected rank-size rule does not hold. 
Having observed Theorem 1, one would next ask for what kind of rank functions the strong expected rank-size rule holds. Concerning this question, the following theorem would be obtained by the use of Lemma 2: 
Theorem 2. If there exist strong expected rank-size rules given by eq. (18) then such rules are given by
For
Proof. Rearranging eq. (19) with respect to, we obtain 
From the assumption of Theorem 2 it follows that rank function should not contain variable n, so that 
Thus eq. (26) is written as 
Solving this iteratively, we obtain 
where is the minimum positive integer of. 
Concerning constant, we obtain from eq. (2)
Hence c(n) is given by 
Substituting eqs. (29) and (31) into eq. (18) and setting. we obtain eq. (25). Q.E.D. 
Having established the necessary condition for city size distributions which satisfy the strong expected rank-size rule, we shall next turn to a sufficient condition. In observing eq., one may easily obtain the following conclusion : 
Theorem 3. The Pareto city size distribution satifies the strong expected rank-size rule given by eq. (25). 
Proof: In eq. (1l), replacing and by and i respectively, eq. (25) is immediately obtained. Q.E.D. 
From this theorem, we realize that there exists at least one city size distribution which satisfies the strong expected rank-size rule given by eq. (25). Unfortunately, however, we do not succeed in proving whether or not the Pareto city size distribution is the only one that satisfies eq. (25). In this connection however, it may be of interest to notice the following property. After suitable standardization with respect to, we may be able to consider an asymptotic rank-size rule. i.e., 
Actually, Gumbel-Smirnov’s (1452) theorem shows the following result: 
Theorem 4. lf any size distributions have the limiting distribution of ranked r city size us the number of cities becomes infinite then the asymptotic rank-size rule, given by
Holds
The essential part of this theorem is proven by Smirnov (1952, the reader should consult the proof of theorem 5 on p. 135). According to Smirnov, if the limiting distribution of exists, then it must be one of just three types, namely, 
Since the value of city size should be positive, the only meaningful distribution in our context is. In this case, the asymptotic expected city size of rank is given by 
Where. Hence eq. (33) holds.
Concerning this theorem, the following point should be remarked. One may consider that the limiting distribution of is likely to exist in an actual context. However, even after suitable standardization, the limiting distribution will not exist for an arbitrary city size distribution. To see this more precisely, let us examine Smirnov’s necessary and sufficient condition for the distributions which belong to. According to Smirnov (1952, theorem 7, p. 140), this condition is given by 
Suppose this holds for. Then the above equation is written as. Solving this functional equation we obtain, the Pareto distribution. From this result, it may follow that the limiting distribution of ranked r city size, exists only when the tail of city size distributions approaches that of the Pareto distribution. 
Having established Theorems 1-4, let us now consider their implications. As was mentioned in section 2, the rank-size rule is ordinarily given by eq. (S), i.e. However, Theorem 2 may suggest that the rank-size rule should be replaced by. Obviously this rule is functionally different from the ordinary one, but in an empirical context, they are ‘close’ to each other. To see this more explicitly, let us recall that the parameter value of q in is close to one. In particular, when, the rank-size rule is often referred to as the Auerbach Law. Although we realize from Theorem 1 that no city size distributions exist which satisfy Auerbach’s law, it may be of interest to notice that the strong expected rank-size rule, given by 

holds when. This rule is ‘close’ to Auerbach’s law. In particular, for large r. For small r, however, the difference is not negligible. To see this in the Hokkaido region data, the values of and are plotted along r-axis in fig. 3.2. Interestingly enough, we notice that is relatively more constant than. This may-imply that in the case of the Hokkaido region, the rank-size rule holds stronger than the rank-size rule. Besides the Hokkaido case, Allen’s (1954) study shows that the parameter value of y is close to but larger than one in many European countries. This may also support the rank-size rule. Hence we may conclude that the rank-size rule would be more appropriate than the ordinary rank-size rule not only in a theoretical but also in an empirical sense. 
With the above implications in mind, let us consider a statistical test for the expected rank-size rule. As was mentioned in section 1, the conventional test for the ordinary rank-size rule employs the OLS method. This method may also be applicable to the expected rank-size rule given by eq. (25) when the value of parameter y takes positive integers. In particular, the case of i.e., the expected rank-size rule given by eq. (39) is of concern in an empirical context. In this case, one may employ the ordinary linear regression hypothesis which is written as 
Although this method is accepted in practice, we notice at least two theoretical difficulties in it. The first difficulty would arise from the assumption that the error term E, has the normal distribution, which implies that P, has a normal distribution. From eq. (7), however, we realize that P, has the pdf given by 
Hence the pdf of is written as 
Obviously this is not a normal distribution. Moreover, since the form of varies according to rank r, we have heteroscedasticity. The second difficulty may be easily understood if one considers the apparent relation 
Substituting eq. (40) into this inequality, we obtain 
This implies that the error terms E, and E, are not independent. Stated more precisely, the joint distribution of P and P is given by 
This violates the assumption 
Furthermore, one should notice the following two ‘tricks’ associated with the above OLS method. To explain the first ‘trick’, consider an ordinary linear regression given by, and observed values where. In this context, it is probable that the case, will occur for some r. However, in the above OLS context where, (ranked value), this case never occurs, that is, from eq. (40) it follows that the relation 
always holds. Hence it is likely that a series of observed values 
will show a smooth monotonically decreasing property, which would inevitably make the rank-size relation ‘regular’. The second ‘trick’ concerns the variable transformation. Since function log P is concave, i.e., 
the variance of Q, becomes smaller than that of P. Thus it is likely that a more ‘regular’ rank-size relation will be observed in the transformed values (Q,) “ban in the original values. This ‘trick’ may be intuitively seen if one compares figs. 1 and 3, where coordinates and are plotted respectively. Although these figures are essentially the same, it appears that fig. 1 is more ‘regular’ than fig. 3. From the above argument, we may conclude that the OLS method formulated in eq. (40) would overemphasize the regularity of the rank-size relation. Moreover, when the rank-size rule given by eq. (25) is of concern, this method is useless, because eq. (25) cannot be transformed into a linear form by the transformation. 
Having noticed these shortcomings, let us now consider an alternative method for testing the rank-size rule given by eq. (25). To do so, we should recall Theorem 3 saying that the Pareto city size distribution shows the expected rank-size rule given by eq. (25). This may suggest that the expected rank-size rule would be alternatively tested by testing the Pareto city size distribution. One would then recall the goodness-of-fit method which was attempted in section 1. This method, however, has a shortcoming in that a conclusion changes according to the choice of a unit interval. That is, if a large unit interval is chosen, the Pareto city size distribution may be accepted, while it may be rejected if a small interval is chosen. To avoid this shortcoming, we may test the Pareto city size distribution by the following method developed in statistics. (Since this method has been extensively studje$ in statistics, results are briefly summarized here.) 
The parameter values P and Q of the Pareto city size distribution [eq. (3)] will ‘be estimated by the maximum likelihood method as 
respectively, where are observed values.
The hypothesis that a city size distribution is the Pareto distribution with fixed parameter values and will not be rejected if 
where and are respectively the lower and upper critical points of the distribution with 2n degrees of freedom.
A confidence limit for parameter a is given by 
Recalling, the expected rank-size rule given by eq. (39) will be tested by this equation. This method may have more advantages than the OLS or goodness-of-fit methods, because the above method is free from the normality and independence assumptions or arbitrariness yielded from a choice of a unit interval. 
In the Hokkaido region case, the estimated values of parameter P and a are given by and. The 95% confidence limit for parameter a is. Hence the hypothesis of cannot be rejected. This may imply the hypothesis of the expected rank-size rule given by eq. (39) cannot be rejected in the Hokkaido region. 
The major conclusions of this paper would be summarized as follows: 
Under Assumptions 1 and 2, a city size distribution may be related to the expected city size of rank by use of order statistics. 
Then the rank-size rule would be written as, which may be called an expected rank-size rule. 
In this context, it is shown that the Pareto and log-normal city size distributions do not satisfy this expected rank-size rule (Proposition 1). 
Moreover, there does not exist any city size distribution which satisfies this expected rank-size (Theorem 1). However, relaxing the expected rank-size rule into, it is shown that the Pareto city size distribution satisfies the expected rank-size rule given by (Theorem 3).
Furthermore, this expected rank-size rule is the only form that satisfies Assumption 2 (Theorem 2). 
When, this expected rank-size rule is written as which may correspond to the Auerbach’s law, i.e. In the Hokkaido region data, the rank-size rule shows a better fit than the rank size rule.
To test the expected rank-size rule (or the ordinary rank-size rule), the OLS method may be used by taking a logarithm transformation. The OLS procedure is, however, theoretically disputable. 
To avoid this shortcoming, being based on result (v), the expected rank-size rule would be alternatively tested by testing the Pareto city size distribution by eqs. (48) and (49). 

