The work of Singer [30] represented one of the first systematic empirical analyses of city size distributions, although the problem had been considered earlier by Auerbach [3], Goodrich [13], Lotka [15], and others. Perhaps the most intriguing aspect of Singer’s contribution was the demonstration that the Law of Income Distribution outlined by Pareto [22] had a precise equivalent in the size distribution of cities: 
Or
where x is a particular population size, y is the number of cities with populations greater than x, and A and a are constants, a being the so-called “Pareto coefficient.” Singer thus proposed his Courbe des Populations as a counterpart to Pareto’s Courbe des Revenus, and examples were presented from seven nations, three of them for more than 1 year. 
Singer [30, p. 254] went on to argue that the Pareto coefficient a could be regarded as an index of metropolization which would give “an exact quantitative measure for the relative roles of the smaller and larger types of human agglomeration.” Consequently, the lower the value of a, the greater would be the proportion of large cities and the higher the degree of metropolization or interurban concentration. Furthermore, given the extent of urbanization, the value of GNP per capita, and the level of transport costs, the lower the value of a, the greater would be “. the relative importance of urban land values and location rents” [Singer, 30, p. 2591. The Pareto coefficient does have certain limitations, and is, of course, only one of a number of measures of city size inequality or interurban concentration within a system of cities; see, for example, El-Shakhs [8], Marshall and Smith [16], Sheppard [26], and Wheaton and Shishido [49]. 
Some two decades after Singer’s work, Allen [l] provided a number of extensions to this earlier work and was able to analyze the city size distributions for 46 nations and territories, 9 of them -over time. Allen, as Singer before him, avoided becoming too deeply involved in international comparisons, apart from noting that the value of a for most nations lay within the range of 0.85 to 1.15. The two major conclusions of his analysis dealt with the historical variation of a within individual urban systems. The first was that for many nations the value of a had tended to fall from relatively high values to “values much nearer unity” by the close of the 19th century, indicating a tendency toward increased levels of metropolization or concentration (Allen [l, p. 1871).A second conclusion was that in most nations (for which statistics were available for long periods of time) the value of a  had tended “ to change very little in recent decades” (Allen [l, p. 1861). Interest in the analysis of city size distributions has increased considerably since Allen’s work. There have been numerous empirical applications of the Pareto distribution, and these have been concerned with the size structure of firms (Simon and Bonini [29]) and industrial plants (Wedervang [48]), as well as the distribution of city size (Ward, [47], Moore [19], Lasuen et al. [14], Rosen and Resnick [24]). This empirical investigation has been accompanied by the exploration of theoretical rationales for the Pareto distribution, e.g., Beckmann [4], Simon [27,281, Steindl [32, 33], and Vining [44]. 
It is against such a background that this exploratory note is written, the purpose of which is to consider the possibility of a systematic temporal variation in the Pareto coefficient a within individual nations. An underlying contention will be that developments within urban systems during the 20th century, particularly during the last 50 years, have rendered previous conclusions about the temporal variation of a not necessarily wrong, but incomplete. 
Before proceeding, however, it might be well to deal briefly with several considerations relating to the analysis of the urban system in terms of the Pareto distribution. The first relates to the form of the distribution. In the various works referred to above, the distribution has been expressed in two forms: the original Pareto form of (1); and the Lotka [15] form, which is expressed as 
Or
where y is the population of a particular city, x is the rank of that city (the number of cities with populations greater than or equal to y), a is the slope parameter, and A is the intercept parameter, and represents the population of the largest city. In the Lotka form, therefore, the axes of the Pareto form are transposed, i.e., rank (which is used instead of cumulative frequency of cities “greater than” a given size) is plotted on the x axis, while city size is plotted on the y axis. There is thus only a slight distinction between the two forms which is based on the definition of cumulative frequency. The two forms are merely different representations of the same distribution. The parameters of the Pareto form and those of the Lotka form can therefore be related to each other by the following very close approximations: 
and
If, however, each form of the Pareto distribution represents a regression line which describes a given size distribution, we have the approximation the value for R2 being virtually identical for the two forms. Opinion apparently varies as to which of the two forms is preferable. The rank size or Lotka form is typically employed when data are available on individual cities, while the original Pareto form has usually been applied to city data arranged by size class. Certain authors, such as Clark [6] and Rosen and Resnick [24], have adopted a hybrid version of the two forms, in which rank (rather than cumulative frequency greater than) and size are plotted on the “Pareto” axes of (1). 
A second consideration involves the practical problem of comparing two or more distributions which can be said to conform to the Pareto distribution. One obvious difficulty militating against comparison (whether temporally or on an international cross-sectional basis) concerns the consistency with which the city has been defined in the various distributions under investigation. In some cases data are based on the “city proper,” while in other cases they are based on the urban agglomeration or metropolitan area. A related problem of data comparability involves the consistency with which the lower city size cut-off has been applied. Various criteria have been employed for the lower cut-off size in urban systems. These include (a) a size involving a particular level of population, e.g., Lasuen et al. [14] used a city population size of 10,000; (b) a size based on rank, e.g., Rosen and Resnick [24] used the population of the city of rank 50, although some modifications were introduced; (c) a size above which the combined population of cities accounts for a given share of some larger population, e.g., Wheaton and Shishido [49] considered those metropolitan areas with a combined population amounting to 70%of the total urban population; (d) a size based on the frequency within a size class, e.g., Sakashita [25] used the central value of that size interval for which the frequency was at a maximum. 
A third consideration, also relating to comparison, concerns the significance of differences in a  values among distributions. The statement is frequently made that the Pareto distribution (or its Lotka counterpart) describes the distribution of city sizes down to a certain population size and that the value of the Pareto coefficient a assumes an approximate value of unity. However, since the logarithmic nature of the Pareto distribution renders it sensitive to small changes in the value of a, the term “approximate” may be insufficiently precise, a factor which has an obvious importance when describing and attaching significance to variations in the value of a over time. 
Tables l-3 review the results of fitting the Pareto distribution to available data on city size for a number of nations, each a value representing the Pareto coefficient for a particular year. In certain cases the a values have been derived from size-frequency data contained in published sources, while in other cases they represent the results of earlier studies. Where these studies employed the Lotka form of the Pareto distribution (2) the a values were transformed into a values by the method discussed in the previous section. For a given nation the lower cut-off criterion was the same for all years, so as to maintain comparability within the time series, and for the same reason, data based on the “city proper” were used. 
Table 1 indicates the results for Egypt, India, Nigeria, and Turkey. In each case it is apparent that the value of a falls over time (indicating a continuing process of concentration), although in the case of Egypt the fall does not appear to have begun until after World War II. The general pattern for Table 1 is in keeping with Allen’s conclusion that within individual nations the value of a tends to display a historic decline. Table 2 presents the results for Brazil, Japan, Spain, and USSR, but here the general pattern is somewhat different from that occurring in Table 1, with the a values decreasing and then exhibiting a slight upturn. In other words, the trend of increased concentration is followed by a mild tendency toward decreased concentration. In the case of Japan, the process of concentration, which was gaining momentum in the first part of the 20th century, was interrupted and actually reversed during World War II (at which time considerable evacuation from the larger cities took place), but continued after the war until the 1970s when the urban system began to display a decrease in the level of concentration. The Sakashita [25] analysis confirms this pattern over the period 1955-1975. Table 3, referring to Austria, France, Sweden, and USA, indicates yet another pattern. For each of these nations, there exists a well-established U-shaped pattern of a values over time, indicating a trend of increasing concentration followed by a marked decrease in concentration. In the case of Austria the trough in the a values is reached around World War I. The decrease in the a values may well have continued, had Austria not ceased (in 1919) to be part of the considerably larger Austro-Hungarian Empire, a development which precipitated a reduction in interurban concentration within Austria itself, as a result of the slow growth or decline of some of the larger cities. 
Some insight into these seemingly distinct patterns of variation of a values may be gained by relating them to levels of economic development within their respective nations. Thus the nations referred to in Table 1 (Egypt, India, Nigeria, and Turkey) all tend to have relatively low levels of development (as measured, for example, by GNP per capita), the process of economic development having commenced relatively recently. By contrast, the nations in Table 2 (Brazil, Japan, Spain, USSR) have significantly higher levels of economic development, especially in the case of Japan, and the development process has been continuing over a longer period. In the case of the nations in Table 3 (Austria, France, Sweden, and USA) the levels of development are among the highest in the world and the process of development has extended over a relatively long period. In the light of this broad relationship between the within-nation temporal variation of a and the level of economic development, two tentative conclusions suggest themselves: (1) after the period of modem economic development has commenced, a nation appears to passthrough a sequence of decreasing and then increasing a values (i.e., a U-shaped pattern); (2) the higher the general level of development that a nation has attained, the further along in this sequence of a values that nation will be. These two conclusions are not at odds with the earlier findings of Allen [l], regarding the historic decline in the a values and their (then) contemporary stability. By the end of the time period on which Allen’s work was based, the increase in a had only just begun to manifest itself for certain nations and probably for this reason was not remarked upon. And furthermore, what appeared to be stability in the a values may have actually represented a transitional phase between decreasing a values and increasing a values. 
It should be noted that since the a values are derived from data based on the city proper (rather than the urban agglomeration), at least part of the increase in a values for certain nations must be due to the suburbanization of population in the larger cities, rather than to a decrease in interurban concentration (Parr and Jones, [23]). This raises a more general problem: the possibility that the precise nature of the U-shaped sequence of a values, and therefore a nation’s position in this sequence, may vary considerably according to the nature of the data employed. For example, in contrast to the pattern of a values for India shown in Table 1 which is derived from city-proper data, a study by Mills and Becker [18] based on urban-agglomeration data for the period 1901-1981 reveals that the decrease in a values is only apparent from 1931 and perhaps only from 1961. The nature of the U-shaped sequence may also vary according to the criterion of the lower cut-off size, since perfect correspondence to the Pareto distribution can never be expected. For example, in the Moore [19] analysis for the USSR, which uses a cut-off size based on rank, the increase in a values (i.e., the decrease in his b or a ’values) begins considerably earlier than it does in Table 2 where the cut-off size is based on a particular population level. 
Aside from this possible sensitivity of results to the form of the data, the fact that many nations in the world have not reached the position where their respective a values are increasing over time tends to make the two aforementioned conclusions difficult to sustain. It is at this point that the question arises as to whether international cross-sectional analysis (for a particular point in time) may be able to cast light on the issue of temporal change within an individual nation, as is sometimes the case in problems of this type, the work of Williamson [50] on interregional income inequality being perhaps the best known. An early study of 37 nations by Berry [5, p. 5851, using various types of size distribution rather than a single distribution, concluded that “. ..different city size distributions are in no way related to the relative economic development of countries.” Since we are concerned here solely with the Pareto distribution, it would be interesting to determine the effect of plotting the level of a against the level of development for a reasonable sample of nations at approximately the same point in time. A U-shaped pattern in this connection would indicate that the a value was high for nations with low levels of development, low for nations of intermediate development, and high for nations with high levels of development. Such a finding would lend some support for our two preliminary conclusions, particularly if the cross-sectional U-shaped pattern was observed for a number of different points in time. 
Unfortunately, no U-shaped pattern across nations appears to exist. This is even evident from the limited data presented in Tables 1-3, if the a values of the various nations for a particular year (e.g., 1960 or thereabouts) are plotted against their respective general levels of GNP per capita, as outlined above. Naturally, the absence of a U-shaped pattern here may be due to the lack of comparability among nations in terms of the lower cut-off size. However, the Rosen and Resnick [24, p. 182] cross-sectional analysis of 44 nations for around 1970, in which the problem of comparability is largely overcome, confirms the absence of a U-shaped pattern between a and GNP per capita. The most likely reason for the absence of such cross-sectional patterns lies in the fact that while a is a relative measure, the range over which it varies with GNP per capita may differ substantially from nation to nation, depending on the nature of the spatial distribution of urban population at some initial point in time and the areal extent and shape of the nation, as well as the degree of governmental and administrative centralization, the historical patterns of migration streams, the changing structure of transport costs, etc. The absence of a U-shaped pattern between a and development across nations at any given point in time does not, of course, preclude the possibility of a U-shaped pattern between a and development (and thus between (r and time) within an individual nation. It does mean, however, that we cannot look to cross-sectional analysis to support the earlier findings, which were based on the temporal experience of particular nations. Consequently, we are forced to rely on within-nation evidence of the type presented in Tables l-3. 
It would be unrealistic to expect that every nation conformed to the U-shaped pattern of temporal variation in a. In the case of small nations, for example, the dominant influence of larger neighboring nations over the long run may well cause the emergence of different patterns. Furthermore, events such as wars, natural disasters, and the creation of new nations as a result of secession or independence, particularly if the latter results from the division of a previously unified colonial territory, could each lead to patterns of a values other than the U-shaped one. Moreover, a particular nation with an initially low level of urbanization but a high level of concentration (due to such factors as recent settlement, centralized colonial administration, or pronounced external orientation) may subsequently experience an initial decrease in concentration (i.e., increasing a values), before ultimately conforming to the pattern of increased concentration followed by decreased concentration. The urban system of Egypt (see Table 1) appears to be following such a course. 
Attention now turns to the possibility of theoretical support for the U-shaped sequence of values of the Pareto coefficient. The considerable amount of work undertaken on the statistical modeling of growth processes suggests that this area may provide a helpful starting point. However, while the models are couched in terms of time-related processes and are largely concerned with the long-term convergence toward an equilibrium (stochastic or otherwise), they do not usually address themselves to the question of parameter variation over time, and even when this is considered the explanation must eventually be concerned with economic and demographic considerations (Steindl [32, pp. 245-246]). This approach was followed in the cross-sectional study of Rosen and Resnick [24] which found that variables such as total population, area, GNP per capita, and railway mileage density were consistently significant in explaining the variation in OL among nations. Given the availability of data, a similar approach could readily be employed in the context of an individual nation over time. It is also possible to adopt a more general perspective and outline a framework based on regional growth analysis and location theory, which focuses on the two components of the U-shaped pattern: decreasing a values and increasing a values. The obvious drawback of such an approach is that it involves generalization across nations of differing size, age, and economic experience. Decreasing cy values, implying increasing levels of interurban concentration are frequently associated with periods of rapid economic development. 
For nations whose development is dependent on the export of natural resources, a pattern of urbanization based on the growth of subregional collection points, regional transportation nodes, and major ports, is an obvious cause of concentration. In the case of nations whose development is based on industrialization for internal and external markets, the exploitation of economies of scale in production foster surbanization as well as the tendency toward interurban concentration. In both general situations the process of concentration is facilitated by (and ultimately dependent on) improved interurban and interregional transportation. Such improvements confer a differential advantage on the various cities that comprise the urban system, so that there tends to be a highly selective pattern of growth among cities, causing a to decrease. With the expansion of GNP per capita and, perhaps more crucially, the continued improvement in transportation, the likelihood of further concentration is enhanced. Not only can the internal economies of scale continue to be exploited, but external economies assume an increasing importance, giving rise to localized industrial complexes based on interindustry linkages. The pattern of differential growth rates tends to persist, with the established larger centers benefiting from initial advantages and tending to gain the greatest population growth. 
The trend toward increasing interurban concentration is unlikely to continue indefinitely as development occurs, since it tends to be a self-limiting process. It is retarded and eventually reversed by the coming into play of hitherto unimportant factors which lead to reduced levels of interurban concentration, i.e., increasing values of a. Typically, the collective influence of these factors leads to a shift from the established core regions of a nation to the peripheral regions, in terms of population distribution, activity patterns, and overall economic status. Shifts of this type, which have been reported on in some detail by Vining and Kontuly [45], Vining and Pallone [46], and Williamson [50], may be based on a variety of influences including resource endowment, improved accessibility to national markets, and factor cost advantage. Once the process is underway it tends to be strengthened by a number of other influences. First, as the peripheral regions begin to exert a sufficiently high demand, the possibilities for regional import substitution become increasingly strong, favoring a more regional pattern of production. Second, within the larger metropolitan areas, high factor costs and negative externalities stemming from congestion and pollution tend to diminish the locational attractiveness of these centers. Third, the amenity factor exerts an influence by drawing population and economic activity to particular regions in a mutually reinforcing manner. One additional influence involves the role of government policy. It appears, however, that apart from certain notable exceptions, policies designed to foster deconcentration have typically had only a marginal effect (Mills [17] and Sundquist [35]). 
These various factors favoring the development of peripheral regions tend to be exerted within a general environment of continuing improvements in interregional transportation and communications, a general reduction in the locational uniqueness of cities within the urban system, and a changing product mix toward economic activity with less rigid locational requirements. The overall effect is to encourage the development of the medium-size cities (such as regional capitals) and some of the smaller cities, and to curb or even reverse the growth of the larger metropolitan areas. In other words, there is a decrease in the level of interurban concentration which manifests itself in an increase in a values. 
In attempting to account for the U-shaped temporal variation in a within a national urban system, emphasis has been placed on the influence of economic development. However, the age of a national economy (i.e., the period over which modem economic development has been occurring) may also be a factor determining the passage through the sequence. One possible argument is that older nations tend to be more advanced in the sequence than younger ones. To be sure, there is a strong tendency for older economic systems to be systems with relatively high levels of development. Nevertheless, the age effect might be a useful supplement to the level-of-development effect as an explanatory factor in analyzing the U-shaped sequence of a values within a nation. 
The application of the Pareto Law to the analysis of city size distributions appears to yield more distinct patterns when this is undertaken for individual nations over time than when it is undertaken cross-sectionally among nations. On the basis of the admittedly limited evidence presented here, which is concerned with the modem era of economic development, there are grounds for supposing that within a nation the value of the Pareto coefficient a tends to display a U-shaped trend over time, and that the position occupied by an individual nation in this sequence is related to its overall level of development, and perhaps to its age. While there are a series of economic arguments that can be put forward to support such findings, they remain very much in the nature of hypotheses, and as such will need to be tested further, before any stronger conclusions can be derived. Problems regarding the availability of comparable time-series data on city size can be expected to render the task of testing a difficult one. The application of the Pareto distribution has been considered here at the national level, but attention may also be directed to the regional level, e.g., Lasuen [14] and Mills and Becker [US].Analysis at this scale should be regarded as no less important, especially since the question of city size distribution” is integral to the development of theories of regional structure and growth” (Moore [19, p. 465]). 
The normative implications of this note are not immediately obvious. Naturally, a modification of the size distribution of cities within a nation as an end in itself can seldom constitute a meaningful policy objective, any more than can a policy aimed at letting forces run their course, with the expectation that a desired level of concentration will eventually be attained. A more sensible way of proceeding is to view any proposed regional/sectoral policy within the context of the subtle and complex relationship which exists between interurban concentration and economic development, and following on from this to recognize that certain policies designed to modify the level of concentration may be premature in the sense that they can only be realized at the cost of reduced overall levels of economic development, a cost which may nevertheless be deemed to be worth incurring. 

