Urban economics and, more generally, the whole field of urban analysis, has traditionally been divided into two main branches. One branch, involving interurban analysis, looks at the interconnections among cities and how these cities exist as a single interacting system with respect to such characteristics as geographic spacing, functional complexity, and size structure. The other branch is concerned with intraurban relationships and focuses on the individual city or metropolitan area. It is typically concerned with such aspects as the internal patterns of land use and the spatial structure of economic activity, as well as the operation of labor markets and housing markets. Aside from the fact that certain important topics in urban analysis do not belong exclusively to a single branch, this interurban-intraurban dichotomy probably represents a useful way of partitioning the subject matter. Nevertheless, it must be recognized that such a division is an essentially artificial one and, more importantly, that it can direct attention away from important links that may exist between these two branches of urban analysis. The exploration of one such set of links forms the basis of this paper, which will be primarily concerned with population distribution at both the interurban and intraurban levels. There are, of course, precedents for this. The work of Stewart and Warntz (1958) considered the two levels, as did a study by Barr and Leven (1972) which examined population distribution by means of a matrix formulation in which each column represented a particular size class of urban center and each row represented a particular urban density level. 
The specific concern here is with relating the apparent regularities of the population distribution within individual cities to the regularities with which the urban population of a nation is distributed among cities. A number of authors have commented on the desirability of linking these two kinds of distribution; see Berry (1964), Dziewonski (1975), and Richardson (1978). However, remarkably little progress has been made in this direction. Weiss (1961) approached the problem in the context of service provision, and demonstrated that the two distributions would need to be considered jointly if the urban population of a nation was to be served from a set of facilities in an optimal manner. More recently, a model of population distribution has been formulated by Bussiere and Stovall (l977, p.60), based on certain key interrelations between the distribution of city size and urban density functions. Among its various applications this model can be used to answer the question “What will be the total urban area of all cities for any given total urban population?” [authors’ translation]. 
In this paper an attempt is first made to draw the two distributions together in mathematical terms. The discussion then turns to a theoretical consideration of possible interrelations between the two distributions, after which the temporal variation of the parameters of each distribution is examined. This leads to the outlining of an evolutionary model of urban-system development, based on the passage through a number of stages. It needs to be stressed that the general tenor of the remarks presented here is exploratory and speculative rather than conclusive and definitive. Also, the analysis will mainly be concerned with urban systems of Europe and North America, since at this stage it may be premature to extend the analysis to urban systems in other regions of the world. 
We begin by defining the two types of population distribution and briefly reviewing the theoretical explanations that have been advanced for each. For a very large number of settlement systems it has been found that the rank-size distribution, which is a modified form of the Pareto (1964, pp.304-305) distribution, represents an accurate summary of the interurban population structure, at least down to a given size s. The rank-size distribution is generally expressed as follows: 
This is the Lotka (1925, pp. 306-307) form of the distribution, in which p represents city population, R represents the rank of a city (rank 1referring to the largest city), and q is a constant which indicates the rate at which city size decreases with rank. Thus, if the cities of a system (down to a given size s) adhere to the rank-size distribution, the population of any given city is always equal to a constant (the population of the largest city) divided by the given city’s rank, modified by some exponent. Graphically, if both axes are scaled logarithmically, the rank-size distribution is represented by a downward-sloping straight line (strictly speaking, a set of points) with an intercept of p and slope of q. This is shown in Figure 1 by the solid line. 
It is worth pointing out that Equation (1) is something of a simplification. For one thing, in actual urban systems the largest city, or sometimes the largest two or three cities, do not conform to the general trend and lie above the rank-size line. Equation (1) is also a simplification in the sense that it summarizes only the upper tail of a broader size distribution covering the whole array of settlements within a system. This broader distribution typically conforms to the lognormal distribution, indicated in Figure 1 by the broken line whose slope increases at an increasing rate. It has been shown elsewhere, however, that a lognormal distribution, if truncated a t a sufficiently high level, approximates a rank-size distribution; see Parr and Suzuki (1973) and Parr (1976). 
The parameter q is a measure of city-size inequality or interurban concentration, a value above unity indicating a tendency toward inequality or relative concentration, and a value below unity indicating a tendency toward equality of city size or relative lack of concentration. In certain circumstances q can also be used as an index of the extent of spatial concentration. For example, a very high value for q would imply a great unevenness in city size and, under most reasonable conditions, this would imply an uneven distribution of the urban population in simple geographic space. The other parameter p, the population of the largest city, is of less interest. It does not indicate, as might be first thought, the level of total urban population within a system since this depends on both q and p. 
There appear to be two broad types of explanation or rationalization for this interurban regularity of the rank-size distribution. The first, suggested by Simon (1955, 1968), argues that the rank-size distribution represents a steady-state outcome of a growth process. In brief, if cities above a certain threshold size grow according to the “Law of Proportionate Effect,” if over time new cities enter the system at this threshold size, and if the proportion of overall urban growth attributable to the entry of these new cities (i.e., cities attaining the threshold size) is constant, the steady-state distribution will tend to display a rank-size characteristic. This approach has been elaborated by Vining (1974, 1977). A second explanation for the rank-size distribution was suggested by Beckmann (1958, 1968). The starting point of his argument involved a particular hierarchical central place structure which was shown by Losch (1954, pp. 130-132) to result from the supply of a set of goods from cities to their respective market areas, each good having a particular level of scale economies and transportation costs. If the cities of this system were plotted on the axes of rank and size in Figure 1, a step-like pattern would emerge, in contrast to the smoother distribution of city sizes shown in Figure 1. Beckmann argued, however, that if such a structure were subject to random shocks, presumably representing local variability in the underlying environment, as well as the existence of (possibly substantial) noncentral place elements within the overall urban system, the step-like distribution of city sizes would give way to the smoother rank-size distribution see also Parr (1970). 
Turning from the interurban to the intraurban perspective, we now consider the explicit spatial distribution of population within the city. For most urban areas the distribution of population appears to conform approximately to the negative exponential distribution. This can be expressed as follows: 
where D, represents the density of population at distance x from the center, A represents the density of the city center b represents rate at which population density declines per unit of distance from the city center, and x represents the radius of the city, i.e., the distance at which the minimum urban density M is encountered. In verbal terms, the negative exponential distribution of urban population density states that up to a specified distance the population density at a given point in the city is a positive function of the density at the center and a negative function of the distance of that given point from the center. If Equation (2) is plotted with the density axis having a logarithmic scale, the graph of the function, as indicated in Figure 2, is a downward-sloping straight line (with an intercept of A and a slope of b) which is not specified beyond distance.  In addition to this density form of the negative exponential distribution, there is also the population form which indicates the manner in which total population increases with distance from the city center. This form has certain advantages over the perhaps more familiar density form of the distribution, as Bussiere (1972) and others have demonstrated. 
Equation (2) represents the model discussed by Clark (1951) and as such fails to take account of the fact that in many cities the density of population does not reach its peak at the city center, but at some distance away from the center, as indicated by the broken line in Figure 2 (a phenomenon which is frequently likened to the crater of a volcano). When fitted to actual data, therefore, the term A represents an extrapolated value. Nevertheless, as Clark (1951, p. 491) has maintained, “it remains a useful figure; it shows the point to which densities are tending”. In order to accommodate this empirically observed pattern of central density, alternative distributions have been proposed by Sherratt (1960), Newling (1969), and Warnes (1975) inter alia, and these various models have been evaluated by Zielinski (1979)and McDonald and Bowman (1976).If, however, concern is with day-time (rather than resident) population, this crater effect generally disappears and the negative exponential distribution is probably as satisfactory as any of the proposed alternatives [see Vining (1980). Moreover, the crater effect does not usually materialize if net (as opposed to gross) residential densities are being considered, and again the negative exponential distribution is a satisfactory description of urban population densities. 
The value of b, the slope parameter of the negative exponential distribution, represents a relative measure of compactness of the city or its degree of decentralization (suburbanization). By contrast, the value of A is an absolute measure, indicating the maximum level of density, i.e., density at the center of the city. It will be seen later that within a national system of cities for a given point in time, A increases with city size while b decreases with city size, so that under these circumstances A can be regarded as an index of the overall mass of the urban (metropolitan) population. 
A number of attempts have been made to account for the occurrence of the negative exponential distribution in an intraurban setting. Bussiere and Snickars (1970), for example, derived the negative exponential density distribution from the principle of entropy maximization, as developed by Wilson (1970). In this approach, intraurban residential location choices are made under the influence of diverse motivational factors including a propensity to visit the center of the city. Unfortunately, to achieve the desired result it is necessary to assume a generalized cost constraint for which there is little or no economic rationale. What is more, the information within the model tells us nothing about the determinants of the density function. Nevertheless, such an approach does represent a plausible and theoretically interesting basis for the negative exponential distribution. 
The negative exponential distribution has also been derived via the comparative-static models of urban economics. Muth (1969), Mills (1972), Evans (1973), and Couch (1980) have demonstrated that the negative exponential distribution may result from a locational equilibrium in the housing market of a monocentric city of the von Thunen (1966) type. In essence, this equilibrium is based on the underlying trade-off between the (increasing) cost of travel and the (decreasing) price of land housing with distance from the city center. In models of this kind the level of employment is exogenously determined so that the population of the city is external to the model. There is, however, the implicit assumption that the population is great enough to require that all workers cannot live adjacent to their common workplace, so that accessibility to central locations assumes a positive value. There is, therefore, a certain city population threshold necessary before the negative exponential distribution can hold, just as the rank-size distribution is only applicable above a certain threshold size. It will be noted that the density functions derived from the comparative-static location models depend formally on travel costs and also (via the demand for housing) on income levels, and that the latter, in turn, vary directly with city size [see Richardson (1973). This suggests that we can construct a family of density functions based on city size, a possibility that will be pursued in the next section. 
The foregoing discussion was concerned with the nature of the interurban and intraurban regularities and the theoretical bases for them. The feasibility of bringing the two distributions together in mathematical terms is now examined. We start by determining the total city population p for a given city. This is equivalent to the population living within radius x (the distance at which the minimum urban density M is reached), and is given by 
Or
For Equation (3) or (3a) to be taken as a reasonable statement of any given city within a system, two important conditions must hold. First, the city must have a roughly circular shape and contain within its bounds no major parks, lakes, or extensive vacant areas. Second, cities must be located sufficiently far apart that their density gradients do not intersect at a density level higher than the minimum urban density; in highly urbanized areas (such as the western Netherlands or certain coalfield districts of the United Kingdom, France, West Germany, and Poland) this condition may not hold. 
Let us assume that Equation (3) or (3a) is a fairly good approximation of a given city's population. If we now apply subscripts referring to rank to the values of A, by and x, we can present the rank-size distribution of Equation (1) in terms of the formulation of city population indicated in Equation (3)
It is possible to have more specific expressions for and. In the case of we know that its magnitude is influenced among other things by city size see Muth (1969). Stewart and Warntz (1958, p. 101) have estimated a function relating A to city size using 1940 data on US cities. On converting this function to logarithms and using the notation employed here, it can be stated as 
This is a logarithmic relationship, and since the population distribution among cities is assumed to conform to a rank-size distribution, also a logarithmic expression, then we may argue that the central density A is negatively related to rank in such a way that 
Or
where A , is the central density of the largest city and a indicates the rate of decline in central density with rank. 
In the case of, evidence strongly points to an inverse relationship with city size, i.e., the smaller the city, the greater the rate of decrease in density with distance from the center [see Mills (1972, p. 51)]. Using 1950 data on US. Standard Metropolitan Areas, Weiss (1961, pp. 865-866) found a relationship which can be reexpressed as follows: 
Berry, Simmons, and Tennant (1963) derived a similar relationship based on 1950 data on U.S. cities 
Because a rank-size distribution of population among cities is assumed to exist, b can be regarded as a positive function of rank such that 
Or
where is the density gradient of the largest city and p is the rate at which density gradients increase with rank. 
Since we know that within a system A varies directly with city size and that b varies inversely with size, it follows that x must also vary directly with city size, although it is not immediately apparent what the precise form of this relationship will be. The lack of data on x makes it difficult to establish the relationship, although some estimate may be made using an indirect approach. Stewart and Warntz (1958, p. 100) proposed a relationship between (the areal extent of a city of rank R ) and p (the population of that city). When converted to logarithms, this relationship (for US Metropolitan Districts in 1940) can be expressed as 
If it is assumed that each Metropolitan District is approximately circular and that its radius extends to the point where the minimum urban density is encountered (two fairly reasonable assumptions), the following general expression emerges: 
Or
where J and j are constants. This expression can be simplified to 
where G and g are constants. In other words, there is a logarithmic relationship between x and city size. Now, since we are assuming that the interurban distribution of population conforms to the rank-size distribution, there must be a logarithmic relationship between x and rank, although obviously of an inverse nature 
or
where x is the distance at which the minimum urban density M is encountered in the case of the largest city and is the rate at which x changes with rank. 
If the expressions for and contained in Equations ( 5 ) , (6), and (7) are substituted in Equation (4), we finally obtain 
Or
This expression describes the distribution of population not only among cities but also within any city of rank R. There are only two variables within the model: R (the rank of a city) and x (the distance from the center of any given city); the remaining terms represent constants. To summarize, then, Equation (8) describes the distribution of population among the cities of an urban system and also within each of these cities, the actual geographic locations of the cities remaining unspecified. 
We can now make a closer examination of certain aspects of the structure of Equation (8a). If, in Equation (3a), x assumes a sufficiently large value, Equation (3a) can be approximated a s p. Putting the two expressions for population contained in the rank-size distribution of Equation (8a) into this approximated form, we obtain 
Simplifying
So that
Therefore
And
Or
That is to say, under certain general assumptions concerning the shape, internal form, and spacing of cities, which were outlined in the previous section, the degree of interurban concentration q is directly connected to a and b, constants relating the urban-form parameters A and b to the rank of a given city. This characteristic can also be derived from the model proposed by Bussiere and Stovall (1977) in which A and b are related to each other. The causal relationship in Equation (10) is not explicit, but does suggest that the level of interurban concentration and the patterns of compactness and central density across cities within the system follow each other closely. Obviously, this approach is limited by the lack of a causal mechanism, but it is nevertheless useful as a framework for describing the overall urban system, and it will be considered further in Section 6. 
The mathematical approach of the previous section was concerned with bringing the two distributions together. No causal relationship was stated or implied, and the analysis was essentially static, focusing on conditions at a specific point in time. Attention is now directed to the possibility of interaction between the two distributions, and this must necessarily be approached in dynamic terms. An initial example may help to illustrate the manner in which the two distributions can be related to each other in an interactive sense. Let us assume that there is an increase in the extent of interurban concentration, i.e., an increase in the value of q. This could be precipitated by a round of rapid economic growth based, for example, on a major technical innovation. Such an increased level of interurban concentration will therefore be associated with an increase in per capita income throughout the urban system in general but particularly in the larger cities which are experiencing the growth and whose growth is causing the increased concentration. There is considerable empirical evidence, as well as the theoretical argument noted above, to suggest that increased income levels will be accompanied by flatter density gradients [see Mills (1972), Muth (1969), de Borger (1979), Richardson (1976). In this way, a change in the population distribution at one level (the interurban) leads to a change in the population distribution at the other level (the intraurban). In the preceding example, the interrelation between the two distributions was viewed in terms of income levels. Similar interrelations may exist through other channels which include land values, migration flows, and transportation costs. We now consider interactions between the two distributions based on transportation costs. The argument will be based on hypothetical examples, but these are not far removed from real-world conditions. 
We examine first the possible impact of a change in the interurban structure on the intraurban structure, by assuming that there is an improvement in interurban (freight) transportation, which in this case favors the larger cities in the system and thus leads to an increase in the level of interurban concentration, as measured by q. The additional pressure on these larger cities can be expected to influence their internal spatial structures, but the outcome is conditional. If the efficiency of intraurban (freight as well as passenger) transportation is undergoing an improvement, then there will be a tendency for this pressure to be accommodated by a decline in b and possibly a decline in A. If, however, the efficiency of intraurban transportation remains unchanged, there will be a tendency for the pressure to be accommodated by an increase in A and in certain extreme cases an increase in b. 
The two contrasting situations are indicated in Figure 3. In Figure 3a (the case of improving intraurban transportation), Curve 1represents the density function a t some initial point. Curve 1’ indicates the redistribution of population that could be expected to occur in the absence of any pressure of urban growth, i.e., purely as a result of improved transportation within the city. Curve 2 indicates the situation with significant urban growth, and relative to Curve 1 has declined and A has increased, but only slightly. Curve 3 indicates the situation with substantial urban growth, and relative to Curve 1, b has declined but A has displayed a marked increase. This increase in density a t all distances (in Curves 2 and 3) is referred to as the “piling-up” effect. In Figure 3b (the case of intraurban transportation efficiency remaining unchanged), Curve 1 represents the density function at some initial point; such a situation would tend to persist in the absence of urban growth. Curve 2 indicates a situation in which there is significant urban growth, with A increasing (relative to Curve 1) and b remaining the same: a piling-up effect, with some expansion at the periphery of the city. Curve 3 indicates the situation under conditions of substantial urban growth. As can be seen, A increases but b also increases, and while there is a piling-up effect at work, there is little additional expansion at the periphery over that which occurs in the case of Curve 2. 
The causality in the relationship between the two distributions may, of course, be in the opposite direction, so that a change in the intraurban distribution may precipitate a change in the interurban distribution. Let us assume that there is a considerable improvement in intraurban transportation, i.e., the efficiency with which freight and people can be moved increases. This is likely to cause a change in the average density function, with a decrease in both A and b. The effect of this changed intraurban structure on the interurban structure will depend on the nature of interurban transportation. If this is of a high quality, the largest cities which enjoyed a locational advantage, but whose growth was previously constrained because of poor intraurban transportation, will tend to grow, once this impediment has been removed. Urban growth will probably occur in those larger cities in a manner indicated by Curve 2 or Curve 3 in Figure 3a, and as a result of this growth in larger cities, q (the level of interurban concentration) and p will both display an increase. If, by contrast, interurban transportation is a t a low level of efficiency, then an improved level of intraurban transportation efficiency will simply lead to a redistribution of population, involving both a falling central density (a reduction in A ) and decentralization (a reduction in b) within individual cities, in the manner of Curve in Figure 3a, there being no change in the interurban distribution of population. 
It is apparent that the two distributions are able to exert an influence on each other, and not surprisingly these processes of interaction will cause the parameters of each distribution to display a variation over time. Obviously, variations in the parameters of each distribution may also occur in response to changes which are quite independent of the other distribution. With the aid of empirical data for several nations, we seek to establish whether there exists any systematic temporal variation in the parameters of the two distributions. Given this limited data base, generalization is clearly difficult but the evidence does point to the existence of certain patterns. 
Table 1 contains the best-fitting values of p 1and q in the rank-size function of Equation (1) as applied to the urban systems of the U.S.A., U.S.S.R., France, and Germany for selected years. These best-fitting values are based on size-class frequency data presented in previous studies or available from statistical sources. In all cases the data refer to central-city (rather than metropolitan-area) populations, and the minimum cut-off levels are as follows: U.S.A. (2,500); U.S.S.R. (20,000); France (5,000); Germany (2,000). Several cautionary comments need to be made regarding these data. First, in the case of the U.S.A., the definition of “Urban Places” was changed slightly in 1950, so that a problem of comparability arises, although this is probably not serious. Second, the values for the U.S.S.R. after 1926 are derived from data which include cities in the territories incorporated into the U.S.S.R. in 1939. Again, however, this problem of comparability is unlikely to be serious. Third, the 1946 data from Germany do not include cities to the east of the Oder-Neisse Line. Moreover, towards the end of World War I1 there were massive population movements, both within Germany and into Germany from the east. For these reasons, the 1946 values can only be regarded as having a limited significance. 
The broad patterns indicated in Table 1have been summarized diagrammatically in Figure 4, which illustrates the variation in the parameters of the rank-size distribution over four consecutive points in time. The value of q, the slope parameter, is at a relatively low level during an initial period. It then increases steadily until a peak value is reached, after which it begins to decline, indicating first a tendency toward interurban concentration and then one of deconcentration. This latter tendency is not reflected especially well in Table 1 for the cases of Germany and the U.S.S.R. For Germany the value of q only exhibits a decrease in 1946 and there are no further observations after that date. For the U.S.S.R. the value of q does not begin to decrease until 1973, and it remains to be seen whether this was a genuine downturn or merely a fluctuation in a continuing upward trend. 
In the case of the intercept parameter, this increases dramatically at first and then at a much slower rate, until a stage of virtual stagnation or even decline is reached. (The U.S.A. is an exception in this regard, probably because during the period 1950-1970 the urban population was still expanding at a fairly rapid rate, but current trends suggest that the U.S.A. will soon conform to the general pattern.) 
Since the analysis is based on central-city populations, this declining value of q is in part artificial, and results from the process of population and employment decentralization within metropolitan areas, involving the familiar pattern of population decline in the central city and growth in the suburban cities, with an overall growth in the metropolitan area. Nevertheless, the tendency towards a declining value of q is still likely to occur with data based on metropolitan-area populations, and would reflect the general tendency toward interurban deconcentration. But even here the influence of metropolitan-area decentralization may still be present. The U.S.A. and certain European nations have recently witnessed decentralizing tendencies, involving shifts to centers and areas beyond the statistical boundaries of the metropolitan areas, and as a consequence the slow growth or decrease in metropolitan area populations [Mogridge (1973, 197511. Under these conditions, therefore, the process of metropolitan decentralization inevitably becomes part of the process of interurban deconcentration. 
Turning to the intraurban distribution of population, the problem of generalization is made all the more difficult because of the relatively large number of cities involved, each having a distinct structure. Concern here will be with the larger cities of the system. As was the case with the interurban distribution of population, it is possible to derive from actual data certain patterns in the temporal variation of the parameters of the urban density function. Table 2 indicates the best-fitting values for A and b in the negative exponential function of Equation (2), when applied to urban density data for Chicago, Moscow, Paris, and Berlin for selected years. The values for Chicago and Berlin are based on metropolitan-area data, while those for Moscow and Paris are based on central-city data. The patterns of parameter variation in Table 2 are illustrated diagramatically in Figure 5 for four consecutive points in time. These patterns are broadly in accord with those suggested by Berry, Simmons, and Tennant (1963) and more recently by Glickman and White (1979). 
It can be seen from Figure 5 that the A parameter typically displays an increase (sometimes a dramatic increase) and then reaches a peak, after which it declines. By contrast, the slope parameter b tends to be at a relatively high level at the early stages of a city's modern development and then declines steadily with time. Under certain conditions (generally associated with very rapid urban growth and/or inefficient intraurban transportation systems) the value of b may display an increase over a particular period, but this increase is eventually followed by a decline. Evidence presented by Newling (1966, p. 214) indicates that b itself may decline with time at a negative exponential rate, such that 
where b, is the density gradient at time t, b, is the density gradient at some base point 0, and h is a constant indicating the rate of decrease of the density gradient with time. 
It may be noted in passing that once a point is reached in an individual city’s development when A and b are both declining, there tends to be a well-defined temporal relationship between these two values, as Bussiere (1972) demonstrated for particular European and North American cities. Bussiere and Stovall (l977, p. 60) argued that for the individual city the relationship between these two values over time takes the following form: where k and c “define the ‘dynamic’ behavior of a particular city” [authors’ translation]. Now since, as was stated above, there is evidence to suggest that b declines through time at a negative exponential rate, it follows from Equation (11) that A will also tend to decline through time a t a negative exponential rate. 
The previous two sections discussed certain possible interactions between the two distributions and then went on to consider the manner in which the parameters of each distribution behaved over time. Building on this background, an attempt will be made to draw together the two distributions in the form of a “stages” approach to urban change. More specifically, a sequence of stages will be suggested through which many western urban systems appear to have passed. This sequence is based on a series of interactions between the two distributions which is consistent with theoretical expectation as well as with observed temporal variations in the parameters of the distributions. The literature on urban economic development contains a number of stages approaches to urban change. Some focus mainly on the individual city see Thompson (19651, Duncan et al. (1960), Lave (1970). Others are also based on a single city but explicitly recognize the fact that different cities within the system are at different stages of development [See Klaassen and Scemeni (1981)]. Here the emphasis will be on a system-wide view, not unlike the approach proposed by Borchert (1967). Naturally, such a stages approach contains obvious weaknesses, particularly the problems of generalization and the arbitrary segmentation of time into stages. Nevertheless, it has proven to be a manageable way of summarizing events and processes which occur over a very long period of time. 
The sequence of stages is outlined in Figure 6, and because of diagrammatic simplification the various stages are shown as being of equal duration, although this is unlikely to be the case. Furthermore, the timing and duration of a given stage can be expected to vary from country to country. The stages are characterized by particular combinations of trends in the time paths of the parameters and. The parameters p and q characterize the interurban distribution of population, while A and 6 represent the parameters of an unweighted average density function for the larger cities of the urban system (these may consist of the largest 20 cities or that set of cities which accounts for, say, 70 percent of the overall urban population). This emphasis on the larger cities does not mean that the rest of the urban system is excluded from consideration. It will be recalled from Equations (5) and (6) that A and b each vary with city size for a given point in time, so that if information were available on A, a, b, and P, it would be possible to derive a reasonable estimate of the internal structure of any city of rank R. 
This stages approach makes the important assumption that the mathematical structure of the urban system, outlined in Section 3, holds throughout the various stages. In other words, the two distributions (i.e., the rank-size distribution and the set of negative exponential distributions), together with the interrelationships between them as expressed by Equations and, are sufficiently robust that they tend to persist over time, even in the face of significant changes in the economic environment. Thus, while the form of the two distributions remains stable over time, the parameters will vary, as indicated in Figure 6. The time paths for the parameters and are not presented, largely because of the wide diversity of patterns which these can assume. The various stages of urban change are now outlined and an explanation for the sequence is then proposed. 
This initial stage is characterized by a very low quality of interurban transportation which causes relatively little interaction among cities and modest levels of interregional trade. Production thus tends to take place at relatively low levels in a large number of locations, each serving a small market area and (where relevant) each being served from a small supply area. Few cities are able to specialize and serve a wide external market. Economies of scale (and thus the possibility of urban specialization) are limited by the extent of the market, and this, in turn, is constrained by poor transportation. Under these conditions, the value of p tends to be low and perhaps slowly increasing. There is relatively little interurban concentration (or marked inequality of city size), so that the value of q assumes a fairly low and stable value. The population distribution within the major cities is governed by a very poor quality of intraurban transportation, and this is reflected in a high value for 6. The value of A at this stage tends to be relatively low. Since little urban growth is occurring, the values of A and b remain fairly stable during this stage. 
The onset of this stage is signalled by a dramatic improvement in the level of interurban transportation and thus the scope for large-scale production. Production consequently tends to occur in a more concentrated pattern at relatively few points, each serving a much larger market area. Economies of scale and urban specialization are limited by the extent of the market to a much smaller extent than before, as a result of improved interurban transportation see Lampard (1955). This improvement in interurban transportation confers a differential locational advantage on the various parts of the urban system. Certain cities experience very rapid growth. This may be based on local resources, which can now be commercially worked and exported, or on a city’s position as a regional center (central place) or a break-of-bulk (transshipment) point. The cities benefitting in this manner (often, but by no means always, the larger ones) enjoy rapid growth, while other cities stagnate or may even decline due to competition from the more successful ones. This growth of the larger cities causes the level of interurban concentration to increase, so that the value of q will rise. Not surprisingly, the value of p will also increase, sometimes at a rapid rate. 
In contrast to the improvements in interurban transportation, the transportation of people and freight within cities continues to be relatively inefficient see Fales and Moses (1972). During this stage the value of A tends to increase as a result of population growth. Because of the poor surface transportation, the additional population has to be accommodated not so much by expansion at the periphery (although this will occur on a limited scale) as by increasing densities throughout the city. This particular form of the piling-up effect is symptomatic of the problem of urban growth under conditions of poor intraurban transportation see Blumenfeld (1949, p. 61). Under these conditions the value of 6 tends to remain stable, although if the pressure for growth is sufficiently great, it may display an increase. 
Stage III is very much a prolongation of the previous one, inasmuch as the trends begun in Stage I1continue in more pronounced form. There is further urban specialization, as well as an increasingly concentrated pattern of production and an enlarged net of market areas. This concentration of production stems from the continued improvement of interurban transportation which permits the exploitation of internal economies of scale, as well as the external economies of agglomeration (including those based on interindustry linkages), particularly in the larger cities. Differential urban growth rates persist, with the larger cities displaying rapid growth. As a result, p 1increases, as does the value of q. The situation at the intraurban level also represents an extension of the previous stage. The value of A maintains its rise, because of the continued pressure of urban growth under conditions of poor surface transportation. The value of 6, however, tends to remain stable, although it may begin to exhibit a mild decline. This is not due to improved intraurban transportation but rather to the willingness of the higher-income groups, that have benefitted from urban economic growth, to live farther away from their workplaces. 
It is during this stage that the system undergoes dramatic changes at both the interurban and intraurban levels. The value of p continues to increase (albeit at a decreasing rate), while the value of q increases to a peak and then begins to decrease. During this stage there is a rapid improvement in the efficiency of intraurban movement which heralds the era of mass transportation. However, since the efficiency of interurban transportation continues to improve, there is still scope for concentration of production and population. During Stage IV, therefore, a significant constraint on urban growth (namely, poor intraurban transportation) is removed and growth continues in the larger cities, causing q to increase. In other words, more efficient intraurban transportation has permitted a rise in the level of interurban concentration. Ultimately, the value of q reaches a peak and then declines. This appears to be due to a complex of forces which, although starting during this period, become much stronger in the next stage, and are related to improved interurban transportation and other factors favoring geographic dispersal. 
The improvement in intraurban transportation efficiency referred to above, coupled with the high income-elasticity of demand for space, allows a degree of decentralization of population, and this manifests itself in a noticeable decline in 6. However, because of the scope for further interurban concentration, a t least for a time, the value of A maintains its increase, although the continued improvement of intraurban transportation eventually causes A to decline. A decline in A and b is a reflection of population redistribution within the city and more specifically an indication that urban growth can be accommodated by expansion at the periphery rather than by the process of piling up. During this stage, particularly the latter part, there is a tendency for economic activity to decentralize, partly because of improved intraurban freight transportation and partly the result of population decentralization. In fact, the decentralization of economic activity and of population tend to be reinforcing processes encouraging the decline of A and b. 
It can be seen from Figure 6 that during Stage IV both q and A reach their respective maxima and then decline. Evidence from a number of countries seems to point to A reaching its maximum before q. This is supported by the results in Tables 1 and 2. The causes for this tendency are not immediately evident but are probably related to the differential rates of improvement in interurban transportation and intraurban transportation, a theme which will be discussed in a later subsection. 
Many of the distinguishing facets of this stage of the urban development process have their origins in the previous stage. At the interurban scale the trend is toward deconcentration within the urban system. Such a trend follows from a shift of population and economic activity away from the core area(s) of a country toward peripheral regions. This is not to suggest that development has not occurred previously in the peripheral regions, nor that development within the core is at an end: rather, there is a quickening of the pace of development within the noncore regions. This tendency is encouraged by, among other things, the continued improvement of interurban transportation. Developments such as the expansion of a dense long-distance highway network (e.g., the Interstate Highway System in the U.S.A.), the emergence of air transportation, and the radical improvement of telecommunications all contribute to growth outside the core area, permitting hitherto latent locational advantages to be exploited. In this way existing export bases are expanded and new ones developed. These patterns of growth are reinforced by the process of regional import substitution. Markets outside the national core areas become sufficiently large that more local or regional patterns of production are now increasingly feasible. During Stage V, therefore, the advantages of concentrated patterns of production (based on economies of scale and agglomeration economies) in the older, larger metropolitan areas become subordinate to the even greater advantages of access to labor, power, or regional markets, with the medium-sized cities becoming the principal beneficiaries of these locational shifts. 
There are additional factors favoring the growth of medium-sized cities and thus interurban deconcentration. One involves the centralizing impact of improved interurban transportation on patterns of service provision, involving a shift of central place activities from lower levels of the urban hierarchy to the middle levels. Another factor is the impact of increasingly onerous negative externalities in the older and larger metropolitan areas which encourage firms, particularly the larger ones that are able to internalize the positive externalities, to seek more favorable locations beyond the confines of these large metropolitan areas. A further factor is the influence of amenities (especially natural amenities) by which population and economic activity are drawn in a mutually-reinforcing manner to regions beyond the core area see Ullman (1954).The overall impact of these various developments during Stage V is for the larger established centers to exhibit slow or even negative growth rates and for the medium-sized cities to experience relatively rapid growth rates. In other words, interurban concentration continues to decline: the value of q falls and the value of p remains stable and may even decline. It will be noted that during this stage the effect on the urban system of improved interurban transportation tends to be the opposite of that exerted in stages II and III.
At the intraurban scale the trend is toward decentralization within cities. The values of A and 6continue to decline due to the effect of rising incomes and the fact that space tends to have a high income-elasticity of demand. The decline in A and 6 is also due to increased car ownership and, more generally, to improved intraurban transportation, although this occurs at a slower rate than the rate of improvement in interurban transportation. Indeed, the relatively slow improvement in intraurban transportation may be regarded as one of the factors contributing to the persistence of negative externalities and thus to the geographic dispersal from the larger cities, as manifested by the decline in q. This, of course, would be a further instance of the interaction between the two distributions. In this case an insufficiently rapid change in the distribution of population at one level (the intraurban) has an influence on the distribution of population at the other (the interurban). 
It can be seen that there is a subtle and continuing interplay between the two distributions, i.e., between the interurban size distribution of the population and the intraurban density distribution. It appears that the passage of the urban system through stages is related to the development of the economic system as well as to the overall improvement of transportation. The crucial factor, however, seems to be based on the fact that although interurban transportation and intraurban transportation improve continuously, they do so at differing rates see Blumenfeld (1979, pp. 332-352). It is this sequence of differential improvement which gives rise to stages of urban development, each characterized by a particular combination of parameter trends. Such a differential improvementthrough time in the two types of transportation is indicated by changes in the value of T. For any point in time, can be expressed as follows: 
where n, is an index value of interurban (freight) transportation costs expressed in terms of a base year value of 100 and n, is an index value of intraurban (freightand passenger) transportation costs, similarly expressed in terms of the same base year value of 100. Clearly, if through time there is no improvement in either type of transportation, the value of in Equation (14) will remain at 100, and this is indicated in Figure 6 by the line. Similarly, if the two kinds of transportation improve at exactly the same rates, the value of will also remaina t 100. A falling value of through time is indicative of interurban transportation improving at a faster rate than intraurban transportation. By contrast, a rising value of implies an improvement in intraurban transportation at a faster rate than the improvement in interurban transportation. 
It is not the intention here to discuss the construction of the two indices and thus the determination of. Nevertheless, one crucial theoretical issue is mentioned briefly. In constructing a transportation cost index of the type mentioned above (whether interurban or intraurban), it is necessary to weight the expenditures on the various modes of transportation in order to take account of the pattern of usage. A difficulty arises because changes in the technology of transportation invariably lead to a change in the proportions in which the various modes are used, and this necessitates a change in the weightings. A partial solution to this problem is to view each index as an index of minimum unit transportation expenditures, rather than as an index representing a weighted average of expenditures among the various modes of transportation. But in the case of the intraurban transportation cost index we are still left with the problem of the temporally changing composition of the freight and passenger elements. Obviously, this general problem of weighting is deserving of further consideration, and issues of this kind would need to be taken into account in the actual construction of such indices. 
Figure 6 indicates the changes in the value of 7 during the various stages. Initially, in Stage I, when all types of transportation are generally at a low level of efficiency and not improving, the value of is stable at around 100. During StageII, decreases at an increasing rate, reflecting the dramatic improvement in interurban transportation and the virtually nonexistent improvement in intraurban transportation. During Stage III, decreases at a decreasing rate. The value of 7 increases initially during Stage IV, reflecting the onset of an improvement in intraurban transportation at a faster rate than the improvement in interurban transportation, but then decreases. This decrease in 7 is continued in Stage V. Although during this stage there may be dramatic improvements in intraurban transportation (rapidly increasing car ownership and the growth of arterial roads and expressways), the improvement is still at a lower rate than the improvement of interurban transportation (interregional highways, air transportation, and telecommunications). It will be noted that the value of 7 in Stage V is significantly below the Stage I value of 100. This implies that since Stage I, the long-term improvement in interurban transportation has been more pronounced than that for intraurban transportation. An example may help to illustrate this. Today in the urban system of a developed economy it is cheaper than it was 150 years ago to transport a ton of raw material from a riverfront site to a factory located, say, one mile away, in the same city. It is also cheaper today than it was 150 years ago to transport a ton of raw material from a city to a market center located 300 miles away. However,the technologicalnature of transportation improvementshas been such that the reduction in the cost per ton-mile has undoubtedly been proportionately greater in the interurban case than in the intraurban case. 
It needs to be emphasized that the stages depicted above are based on the history of developed western nations and, consequently, reflect the manner in which the technology of transportation evolved there. Certainly, there is no inevitability to this sequence of stages nor indeed to the individual stages themselves. Had the timing of the various transportation innovations been different, the stages and their sequence would have also been different, Furthermore, alternative transportation innovations, production technologies, and an initial population distribution would have probably given rise to a distinct pattern of stages. Moreover, it seems likely that the application of such a stages approach to the urban systems of developing nations would produce different patterns (which would require different explanations) from those discussed above, although generalization in this setting would tend to be more difficult. 
In this paper, a number of attempts have been made to relate regularities in population distribution at the interurban level to those at the intraurban level. Despite the preliminary nature of the findings, several important points emerge. First, the two distributions can be drawn together in terms of a mathematical structure. This initially involved a static framework but, as was argued, the structure can assume a temporal dimension. Second, the two types of distribution are also related to each other in terms of interaction: at the very least, it can be claimed that under a broad range of conditions the two distributions are not independent of each other. The discussion of the bases for interaction was concerned with the structure of transportation costs, and other bases for interaction need to be explored. Third, and following on from the previous point, the nature of the relationship between the two distributions may be obscured by other factors. For example, while the distribution of population among cities may influence the manner in which the populations are distributed within cities, this is only one of a number of influences. Naturally, considerationssuch as these make the task of establishing precise relationships between the two distributions a particularly challenging one. Fourth, the stages approach to urban change outlined here appears to be useful as a framework for generating hypotheses about the development of the urban system. This may have a particular relevance at the present time in casting light on the developmentof urban systems during an era of high energy costs. The stages approach may also be helpful in understanding the difference in the urban development process between developed and developing nations. Furthermore, attempts might be made to relate the urban stages approach proposed here to the development stages approaches of Clark (1940) and Rostow (1960), although the paucity of historical data is likely to be an immediate source of difficulty. Nevertheless, the stages approach does offer a long-term view of the urban development process which permits well-defined regularities at different levels of the urban systems to be integrated within a single framework. 

