The proposed analysis is designed to establish some peculiarities of the system of urban places of Crimea Oblast with the aid of the "rank-size rule." 
The analysis was based on change over time in the parameters of Yu. V. Medvedkov's formula on the "structure of a system of places" [Reference 1]. The formula takes the form 
where P is the population of city of rank j; P is the population of city of rank 1; a is the measure of contrasts in the system (the tangent of the slope of the regression line joining cities of various sizes arrayed in rank order on double logarithmic paper); j is the rank of the city; is the "coefficient of primacy" of the main city in the system p is the population of city of rank 1 as determined by the regression line). 
Table 1 shows the computed parameters for formula (I) for the Crimea. The sources were the census reports for the USSR and for prerevolutionary Russia as well as the Geografichesko-statisticheskiy slovar' Rossiyskoy imperii (St. Petersburg, 1868-73). The calculations covered all the urban places of the Crimea (including urban-type settlements) for every time period (Fig. 1). 
The results yield the following conclusions: 
1. Two periods differing in the measure of contrast a can be clearly distinguished in the evolution of Crimean urban places over the last hundred years or so, namely the period up to the end of the 19th century, and the subsequent period. The first period, in which parameter a changed markedly, may be called a period of "leap like" development. It coincides with the rapid development of capitalism and the associated process of urbanization. (By the end of the 19th century, 42 percent of the Crimean population was already urban; this was three times higher than the mean urbanization level for the country as a whole [2].) That process led to significant changes in the hierarchical distribution of towns and in their functional structure. The second period, from the beginning of the 20th century to the present, may be termed an "evolutionary" period. Throughout this period, towns developed relatively uniformly; no "changes in leaders" occurred, and the structure of the economic base of cities underwent no abrupt qualitative changes, becoming increasingly well defined as time went on. 
2. The figure clearly shows a progressive increase in slope of the array of cities on the double log paper, which, in the view of Medvedkov [1] and Harris [6] , may be interpreted geographically as reflecting an increase in the hierarchical differentiation of the urban places within the system. 
3. An analysis of the role of different groups of cities in the change of the overall measure of contrast [3] suggests that, although the regression lines of the older groups of cities constantly tended to assume a gentler slope (of totally different intensity during various periods), the appearance of new places always brought back the overall regression line to its initial position, which suggests a certain self-regulation of the system. 
4. As time goes on, the measure of proximity of the system to its regression line tends to increase (the mean error of the regression line tends to decline), reaching very high values in recent decades; this suggests a high degree of stability of the system, close to a state of equilibrium. (Pragi has suggested that the regression line reflects the equilibrium (homeostatic state) of system of urban places [3].) 
5. Contrary to Medvedkov's hypothesis [1] that formula (1) is not suitable for the description of an entire system of urban places, but only for a system of major, economically interrelated centers, the expression (1) appears to hold true for the entire system of urban places in the case of the Crimea. This probably suggests a high degree of economic interdependence among Crimean towns. 
6. The totality of urban places in the Crimea can evidently be treated as a system since it seems to fulfill at least four of the six properties of an open system by R. D. Chorley in Haggett [5]), namely: (1) an influx of "energy" to maintain and preserve the system; (2) self-regulation by means of homeostatic changes; (3) preservation of optimal values over a long period; (4) preservation of the organization and form of the system through time without evidence of a trend toward maximum entropy, peculiar to closed systems. 

