Over the last twenty years, an extensive literature developed on city-size dynamics. This literature focuses on two main issues. The first concerns whether or not city-size distribution follows Zipf’s law, that is, whether the logarithm of city size is a linear function of the logarithm of city rank (MORICONI-EBRARD, 1993; GUERIN-PACE, 1995; GLAESER et al., 1995; KRUGMAN, 1996; EATON and ECKSTEIN, 1997; FUJITA et al., 1999; DOBKINS and IOANNIDES, 2000; CUBERES, 2004; GABAIX and IOANNIDES, 2004; ANDERSON and GE, 2005; SOO, 2005; DIMOU and SCHAFFAR, 2007). The second concerns testing whether Gibrat’s law holds for city growth, that is, whether city growth depends on city size (BLACK and HENDERSON, 2003; GABAIX and IOANNIDES, 2004; BOSKER et al., 2008). 
In this literature, most studies have focused on evolution in the urban hierarchies of developed countries. This paper aims to deliver an empirical contribution on urban growth dynamics for economically emerging countries by comparing city-size evolution in both China and India between 1981 and 2004. During this period, both countries turned away from state-owned and state-ruled economies towards a market economy and opened to international competition and foreign direct investment. In India, these changes took place in a rather progressive manner, without any major institutional shock affecting the country’s demographics. In contrast, in China a series of economical reforms have considerably eased Hukou system rules1 and abolished the prevailing cross-region labour mobility restrictions, except for the biggest metropolitan areas. This resulted in boosting interregional migration flows. 
In order to determine whether or not these changes affected the urban hierarchies and dynamics of these two countries, two issues are examined here. Firstly, does city-size distribution in both China and India follow Zipf’s law and, if this is the case, how has this distribution evolved over the last twenty years? Secondly, in these two countries is city growth a random or a deterministic process sensitive to city-size effects? In the latter case, the paper focuses more on city-size growth characteristics and on the intra-distributional mobility of cities. 
The paper is organized as follows. The second section investigates theoretical aspects by presenting, firstly, recent discussions about the distributional form of the rank-size relation for cities and, secondly, the main approaches regarding city growth. The third section deals with methodology issues and data specification for the two countries’ urban systems. The fourth section tests the distributional forms of the Chinese and Indian rank-size relations for cities. The fifth section provides information on the shifts in urban hierarchies in both China and India during the last two decades. The sixth section investigates city-size growth characteristics using panel unit root tests and Markov chains. The last section concludes. 
Most researchers on urban hierarchies consider the fact that city-size distribution follows a Pareto principle. This is a very convenient assumption as it allows the study of urban hierarchies using a single parameter – the Pareto exponent. However, in recent years, some studies have questioned such an assumption, especially when one takes into account the entire distribution of city sizes and not just the upper truncated part. 
ROSEN and RESNICK (1980) were among the first authors to focus clearly on a possible deviation from strict linearity between the logarithms of the rank and the size of cities. By working on a sample of fortyfour countries, they found evidence that, in most cases, the relation between city rank and city size best fits a parabolic-type curve that can be studied by adding a quadratic term to Zipf’s equation. SOO (2005) tested Rosen and Resnick’s equation on the city-size distribution of seventy-three countries: twothirds of the countries had a quadratic term significantly higher (convexity) or lower (concavity) than zero, while only one-third of the sample’s countries had a quadratic term significantly close to zero (for which the Pareto law holds). 
While Rosen and Resnick studied a possible deviation from Zipf’s law, some authors considered that if the entire population of cities is taken into account, then city-size distribution is not a Pareto but a log- normal distribution. Following SIMON’s (1955) earlier work, PARR (1985) assumed that only the upper truncated distribution of city sizes follows a Pareto principle, while the entire distribution better fits a log-normal distribution. However, he pointed out significant data and definition problems that may occur in the latter case. Similar work on US and French city-size distributions by MALECKI (1980) and GUERIN-PACE (1995) revealed contradictory evidence on the form of city-size distributions with regard to the city-size threshold. However, both authors rejected the assumption that higher city-size thresholds tend to confirm a Pareto distribution, while lower ones reject it. 
HSING (1990) claimed that in most of the economic literature researchers have taken it for granted that city-size distribution follows a Pareto principle. He suggested using the Box – Cox transformation in order to test log-linearity between city size and city rank. By working on different data samples, Hsing often rejected the fit between the US city-size distribution and the Pareto law. Following Hsing, CA M E RO N (1990) and ALPEROVITCH and DEUTSCH (1995) arrived at the same conclusions when studying the city-size distributions of twenty-five different countries. 
In a more recent work, EECKHOUT (2004) delivered a rigorous study of the relation between city rank and city size for 23539 US settlements in the year 2000 (representing 75% of the US population). Using a Kolmogorov–Smirnov test, Eeckhout proved that the distribution of city sizes better fits a log-normal distribution, with a mean (in log) equal to 7.28 and a standard deviation (in log) equal to 1.75. According to Eeckhout, most studies building on the US city-size distribution accept the validity of Zipf’s law because they work on truncated distributions. KRUGMAN (1996), GABAIX (1999) and BLACK and HENDERSON (2003) all used small samples of about 135 cities, which corresponds to 0.5% of US settlements and 30.2% of the US population. This truncated distribution fits the tail of the log-normal distribution for the entire population of cities. 
Following EECKHOUT (2004), some studies (ANDERSON and GE, 2005; ZEYNELOGLU et al., 2005; NOTA and SONG, 2006) have confirmed the fit between the log-normal and the entire city-size distribution and have rejected an arbitrary choice for any city-size threshold. However, their definition of a city is problematic since there seems to be no boundary between an urban area and a rural one, right down to a single isolated household. In EECKHOUT’s (2004) sample, the median city size is of 1337 inhabitants, which means that half of the settlements can be considered as merely small villages. This contrasts with the fact that 80% of the US urban population lives within the 256 largest urban agglomerations in the country. Therefore, it could easily be argued that a truncated distribution reveals urban hierarchy patterns much better than the entire one. Moreover, the log-normal distribution depends upon three parameters, that is, the mean city size, its standard deviation and the number of cities, which leads to a less convenient interpretational framework than the Pareto one, which depends upon a single parameter, the hierarchy exponent. 
The distributional form of the relation between the ranks and the sizes of cities seem strictly related to city growth dynamics. Many studies investigate what should be the nature of urban growth in order to lead to a steady distribution that follows either Zipf’s law or an alternative theoretical distribution such as the log-normal or the double Pareto (REED, 2001). 
City growth theories can roughly be divided into random growth (GABAIX, 1999; GABAIX and IOANNIDES, 2004; CORDOBA, 2008) and deterministic growth theories (EATON and ECKSTEIN, 1997; BLACK and HENDERSON, 2003; HENDERSON and WANG, 2007), although in recent years some attempts have been made to provide a less dichotomous theoretical vision (ROSSI-HANSBERG and WRIGHT, 2007; DURANTON, 2006, 2007). 
Random-growth theories consider the fact that city growth is a stochastic process which, in the steady-state, produces, for large cities, a rank-size distribution that obeys Zipf’s law. These theories follow GABAIX’s (1999) basic model, developed under the very restrictive hypotheses of a growing population, free labour mobility for young households and constant returns-to-scale technologies. The growth of cities appears to be a random walk process, linked to randomly distributed exogenous shocks, which generate urban amenities in a multiplicative way and subsequently modify a city’s household utility function. These amenity shocks are either policy shocks (related to the level of taxes, to pollution control, to the quality of public and municipal services and infrastructure such as roads and schools, or to environment protection measures) or natural and historical shocks (due to natural catastrophes, wars, diseases or poor harvests in less developed economies), but Gabaix also considers the possibility of industry-specific productivity shocks in bigger cities. 
At the opposite end of the spectrum, deterministic growth theories assume that cities’ differing sizes depend on firms’ location choices, made when comparing the advantages and drawbacks of each city. Firms concentrate geographically in order to take advantage of conglomeration effects, linked either to specialization (Marshall – Arrow – Romer (MAR) externalities) or to diversification (Jacob externalities), but suffer, on the other hand, from diseconomies due to congestion and the costs of commuting. Following this theoretical framework, EATON and ECKSTEIN (1997) and BLACK and HENDERSON (1999, 2003) developed endogenous growth models in which the size of a city depends on parameters such as scale externalities, human capital concentration and localized information spillovers. Deterministic growth theories do not necessarily produce Zipf ’s law. 
BLACK and HENDERSON (1999) tested the nature of urban growth, while taking into account the heterogeneity of cities through differentiated stocks of human capital. In their initial work on the evolution of the US city-size distribution between 1900 and 1990, they found that cities exhibited parallel growth patterns. However, by relaxing some hypotheses, in particular the strong relationship between urban growth and the role of education to which the growth in human capital was almost exclusively linked, BLACK and HENDERSON (2003) found, in a more recent work, that the average US city size increased under the impetus of technological changes and human capital accumulation, but also that the smaller cities grew faster than the large ones, hence leading to a convergence towards an optimal city size. 
Many studies have tried to test the nature of urban growth in order to explain the steady distributional form of city rank versus city size. When studying growth in France and Japan in the twentieth century, and working with small samples, EATON and ECKSTEIN (1997) found that the k largest cities in each country maintained their ranking over the entire reference period, which means that city growth is parallel, rather than convergent or divergent. On the other hand, in order to test the random growth hypothesis, IOANNIDES and OVERMAN (2003) produced a non-parametric estimation of urban growth by using a sample of large metropolitan areas in the United States from 1900 to 1990. They found that the growth process of US cities obeys Gibrat’s law and hence scale effects play no determining role in city growth dynamics. 
Some researchers have focused on conflict-affected distributions in order to test the consequences of random isolated shocks to the relocation of labour and to the stability of the city-size distribution over time. DAVIS and WEINSTEIN (2002) and BOSKER et al. (2008) examined the time effects of Second World War Allied bombing on German and Japanese city distributions, with contradictory results. SHARMA (2003) rejected Gibrat’s law when studying the long-term effects of partition on India’s urban hierarchies, with respect not only to the city sizes, but also to the cities’ relative growth. Empirical studies on urban growth dynamics in Portugal, the United States or in the Balkans also reveal departures from Gibrat’s law (DELGADO and GODINHO, 2007; GARMESTANI et al., 2007; DIMOU and SCHAFFAR, 2009). 
While empirical work delivers contradictory evidence when it comes to the nature of urban growth and to the distributional patterns of the rank-size relation, some recent theoretical contributions from ROSSI-HANSBERG and WRIGHT (2007) and DURANTON (2007) highlight a less deterministic approach. Following IOANNIDES and OVERMAN’s (2003) work, ROSSI-HANSBERG and WRIGHT (2007) introduced a model able to predict random urban growth under some restrictive conditions such as the elimination of the effects of human capital. ROSSI-HANSBERG and WRIGHT (2007) admitted that city growth depends upon randomly distributed productivity shocks, specific to a localized industrial sector or group of firms. This however does not necessarily result in Zipf’s law, as predicted by random-growth theories, because of the short-term effects of the exogenous productivity shocks. It also supposes that cities are specialized in a single industry, which is rarely the case. 
In a similar way, DURANTON (2006, 2007) modelled the micro-foundations of the stochastic process which leads, through industrial churning, product proliferation and local spillovers, to urban growth. Under the assumption of monopolistic competition, free movement of labour and a fixed number of cities, Duranton showed that innovation-driven shocks at the level of industries and cities may explain the growth and decline of cities. When introducing agglomeration economies and congestion, the model predicts some convergence, leading to a right-skewed (concave) rank-size distribution of cities, which reproduces various French and US features observed over the last twenty years. 
By studying the dynamics of Chinese and Indian urban hierarchies from 1981 to 2004, this paper aims to test the validity of these theories within two countries that have had high economic growth. If city growth is independent from city size, that is, if Gibrat’s law for cities holds, then urban change is not affected by scale effects. Conversely, if city-size growth is a deterministic process, one should examine whether this leads to convergence towards an optimal city size, with small cities growing faster than the bigger ones; divergence, with demographic concentration towards metropolitan areas; or parallel growth, where cities keep their initial hierarchical ranks during the whole period. 
From a methodological point of view, this paper first examines the distributional patterns of the rank-size relation for Chinese and Indian cities, then studies their changes on a decennial base, and finally focuses on urban growth processes and city growth dynamics. 
To begin with, a Kolmogorov–Smirnov test is used to examine the distributional patterns of the rank-size relation with respect to two theoretical distributions: the Pareto and the log-normal. The null hypothesis H0 is that the empirical distribution F follows a theoretical law F0, while the alternative hypothesis H1 is that the two distributions do not match. The goodness-of-fit test provides evidence that the Chinese and Indian city-size distributions, when truncated, are Pareto. 
Secondly, the Pareto coefficient for the 1984, 1994 and 2004 Chinese city-size distributions and for the 1981, 1991 and 2001 Indian distributions is estimated. In both cases the GABAIX and IBRAGIMOV (2009) correction is used which considerably reduces the bias for the ordinary least-squares (OLS) method when applied to small finite samples: 
with. When j=0, Zipf’s law holds perfectly. According to GABAIX and IBRAGIMOV (2009), the best estimation of b, for small samples, is provided when j = 1/2: 
with the approximate true standard error of the estimated coefficient given by (KRATZ and RESNICK, 1996; GABAIX and IBRAGIMOV, 2009; DIMOU and SCHAFFAR, 2009): 
Thirdly, urban growth patterns are investigated. Stationarity in city size is first tested. It was considered that a city’s sizes are generally correlated over time because of the durability of the publicly owned structures, houses and real estate investments. If is the logarithm of the population of a city i at time t, then the size of a city is a first-order auto-correlation process such as: 
where fi,t is the first-order regression coefficient; and an isolated shock at time t (DIMOU and SCHAFFAR, 2009). Two specifications of the model are used, both with fixed-effects and with or without drift: 
where gi = fi − 1; a is a constant; uit controls for the upward trending; and k is the number of the lagged difference term for city i. H0 is the instability hypothesis, where cities’ sizes are non-stationary, versus the alternative H1, where the logarithms of cities’ sizes converge to a constant value in the steady-state. The null hypothesis does not reject Gibrat’s law for cities. 
As SHARMA (2003) and HURLIN and MIGNON (2005) have pointed out, the commonly used unit root tests, such as the Dickey – Fuller (DF) and the augmented Dickey – Fuller (ADF) show little power in distinguishing the unit root from meaningful stationary alternatives when applied to a single equation for short time series. Panel unit root tests appear to be more efficient. The main limitation of these tests is that they are all constructed under the assumption that the individual time series in the panel are cross-sectionally independently distributed (PESARAN, 2007). When it comes to city-size dynamics, such an assumption may be spurious. For example, urban growth may be affected by some common macroeconomic factors for cities belonging to the same region or state; or interregional migration flows may commonly affect some cities closely located. Second-generation panel unit root tests abandon the restrictive assumption of the previous tests and model cross-section dependence. 
Previous empirical literature on urban growth only delivered first-generation panel unit root tests. This paper performs both the LEVIN et al. (2002) and IM et al. (2003) first-generation tests and the CHOI (2002) and PESARAN (2007) second-generation tests. While the first ones do not come to any clear conclusions, the second ones provide evidence that city sizes are not stationary during the 1981 – 2004 period for both countries. 
Finally, intra-distributional dynamics for Chinese and Indian cities are studied. Following EATON and ECKSTEIN (1997), DOBKINS and IOANNIDES (2000), and BLACK and HENDERSON (2003), Markov chain techniques are used. This requires the discretization of the distribution by assigning each city to one of a predetermined number of groups, based on its relative size (BOSKER et al., 2008). In this paper, the discretization process draws upon QUAH (1993) and EATON and ECKSTEIN (1997), with cut-off points exogenously defined at relative city sizes of 0.3m, 0.5m, m and 2m, where m is the average city size for a given year t. It is assumed that the distribution follows a homogenous stationary first-order Markov process and Ft denotes the vector of distributional shares for each group of the discretized distribution: 
Each element ptij of the transition matrix Mt represents the probability that a city moves from the group i to the group j in t. The transition probabilities are estimated with the maximum likelihood method. If ptij = 0, for all i, j, then the Markov chain is ergodic, which means that any city from any group may attain any other group of the distribution. The Markov chain techniques deliver evidence for some differentiation between Chinese and Indian urban dynamics. In India, city-size intra-distributional dynamics feature stability, while in China more significant changes occur. 
With regard to data issues, in this work cities are defined from an administrative point of view. This allows one to obtain a long-run annual city-size series.3 The city-size threshold of the samples is 100000 inhabitants, which is also the threshold used by official Chinese and Indian statistical services for city data, although in China this definition has changed over time. Cities above this threshold represent 59.01% of the urban population in China and 69.25% in India.4 It can therefore be easily considered that both samples represent quite well the respective national urban systems. Furthermore, annual data for cities under 100000 inhabitants are not always available. 
Chinese data are provided by the Chinese Urban Statistical Yearbooks. The city-size series go from 1984 to 2004 and obey the 1984 criteria for defining a city, adjusted to year 2000 statistical changes (ZHOU and MA, 2003; XU, 2008). Hong Kong and the Tibetan cities are excluded. Table 1 gives information about the Chinese sample. 
Three comments can be made. Firstly, the number of cities above 100000 inhabitants has grown strongly in China during this twenty-year period (the annual growth rate of cities entering the sample is 4.82%). However, the trend was faster during the 1984 – 1994 decade (with an annual rate of entry of 7.69%) than the 1994 – 2004 decade (with an annual rate of 2.03%). Secondly, when comparing mean, median and quartile values for city size, except for the first quartile, all other values decrease between 1984 and 1994 and increase afterwards, which indicates a significant change in urban growth trends: during the first decade, urban growth mainly concerns cities under 250000 inhabitants, while, during the second decade, growth is higher for cities above 370000 inhabitants. Thirdly, the medial city size strongly falls during the first decade, then increases, but does not get back to its 1984 level. This confirms the previous comments and also illustrates the results of repeated anti-megacity policies implemented by successive Chinese governments. 
Table 2 provides the same type of information for the Indian sample in 1981, 1991 and 2001, which are the Census years. Cities from Jammu and Kashmir and Annam are not included because the time-series were incomplete. 
The number of cities with a size over 100 000 inhabitants almost doubled between 1981 and 2001, but, contrary to the Chinese case, growth trends seem to have been particularly steady: the annual growth rate of cities entering the sample was 3.25% and remained the same during the whole period. This entry rate is very close to the annual growth of the urban population (3.01%), which could be explained by the fact that urban demographics in India mainly depend upon the natural increase in population (DATTA, 2006). 
In parallel, the mean city size slowly increased (from 361 500 to 403 000 inhabitants) and remained determinedly higher than during the third quartile, which means that India’s urban system is characterized by the presence of some over-populated metropolises and a large group of small and medium-sized cities. The study of the medial city size and its evolution confirms the above trends: in 2001, forty-one cities were home to 50% of the urban population, compared with twenty-four cities in 1981, while the difference between the median and the medial city size increases. This could be interpreted as a sign of non-convergence in city size over time. 
Most studies consider that the upper truncated part of the Chinese city-size distribution follows a Pareto law (SONG and ZHANG, 2002). In a recent work, GAN et al. (2006) contested this fact, while ANDERSON and GE (2005) used the Pearson test to argue that the lognormal distribution provides a better fit for Chinese cities with a size above 100000 inhabitants. However, their definition of a city is based on the 1963 criterion and strongly differs from the actual definition, so the samples also differ. No corresponding study exists for Indian city-size distribution. 
The present paper provides a Kolmogorov–Smirnov (KS) test for the 1984, 1994 and 2004 Chinese city-size distributions and for the 1981, 1991 and 2001 Indian city-size distributions. Histograms of city sizes shown in Fig. 1 seem to indicate that the Pareto law provides a better fit than the log-normal distribution. 
The KS test was first run for a Pareto distribution. In order to optimize its performance, for the Pareto exponent values were used that ranged from 0.8 to 1.5. Tables 3 and 4 provide the results for both countries. 
For China, at the 5% level, all KS statistics have lower values than the critical values (p-values are high), which means that H0 cannot be rejected: the distribution of Chinese cities with sizes above 100000 inhabitants is Pareto. 
India’s city-size distribution reveals an even better fit with the Pareto law. Results in Table 4 show that the null hypothesis is never rejected, with high p-values, which also means that the rank-size distribution of Indian cities of more than 100000 inhabitants follows a Pareto principle. 
The examination proceeds by running the same tests for the fit with the log-normal distribution. All KS statistics reject the null hypothesis at the 1% level when the estimated parameters from the samples are used (Tables 5 and 6). It seems, however, more appropriate to use the hypothesis that the distribution for cities with sizes above the threshold of 100000 inhabitants is the upper part from a truncated log-normal distribution (Fig. 4) that takes into account all the cities, as EECKHOUT (2004) suggested. 
The main problem when considering this issue is that the parameters of the log-normal distribution cannot be estimated, so one needs to proceed by simulation. The authors have run a large number of simulations to test this fit. Among them, for the Chinese case, the parameters estimated by ANDERSON and GE (2005) are used, who found that China’s city-size distribution better fits a log-normal distribution and also calculated new parameters, for example, by dividing all the non-agricultural population by the number of urban and rural districts. 
Table 5 provides the results for both tests in 2004. In all cases, the p-values remain close to zero, which leads one always to reject the null hypothesis. The results are the same for 1984 and 1994. 
It is now tested whether the Indian city-size distribution fits the log-normal distribution. The null hypothesis is rejected when one considers the estimated parameters from the sample, for all years. Then different simulations were also run. Parameters calculated by dividing the total urban population by the number of districts of above 5000 inhabitants were used. The null hypothesis is rejected for 1981, 1991 and 2001 (all p-values are close to zero) at the 1% level. Table 6 provides the findings for 2001. The 1981 and 1991 results are similar. 
Obviously, after running a great number of simulations (for example, by keeping the urban population fixed and by varying the number of human settlements), one can calibrate a log-normal distribution (with a very large number of settlements and a very large standard deviation from mean size) that fits the empirical distributions of Chinese and Indian cities. Such a fit seems, however, a fictive construction for both countries’ urban systems that cannot be verified. 
Following on from the conclusions made in the previous section, this section can now study the evolution of the Pareto exponents for the Chinese and Indian city-size distributions over time. Figs 5 and 6 draw the density kernels for each country and for different dates. In Fig. 5, the 1984 and 2004 density kernels for Chinese cities are quite similar, unlike the 1994 one which is steeper. This reveals some convergence towards a unique city size during the first decade, but not during the second one. The Indian city-size distribution seems fairly steady over time. In Fig. 6, the density kernels for 1981, 1991 and 2001 overlap. The long, thin right tail of the kernel indicates the existence of some very large cities, which contrasts with massive presence of cities with less than 200000 inhabitants. 
The Gabaix–Ibragimov method is used to estimate the Pareto exponents for both distributions. Table 7 provides the results. 
Three comments can be made. Firstly, the Pareto exponent is close to 1 for the Chinese distribution but significantly higher than 1 for the Indian distribution. The latter appears less hierarchical than the former. Secondly, the trend of the Pareto exponent confirms the contrasted movement of the Chinese distribution during the last two decades (its value is 1.076 in 1984, 1.198 in 1994 and 1.089 in 2004) and the slow but progressive movement towards concentration in Indian cities (its value steadily decreases from 1981 to 2001). Thirdly, Zipf’s law (the H0 hypothesis) holds better for the Chinese distributions than for the Indian ones. The results given in Table 7 are close to SONG and ZHANG’s (2002) findings, although they used the simple OLS method for estimating the Pareto exponent, which led them always to reject Zipf’ law. ANDERSON and GE’s (2005) findings also followed the same trend but were slightly higher because of their definition of cities. 
Following GUERIN-PACE (1995) and SONG and ZHANG (2002), one can now examine shifts in both countries’ urban hierarchies when the city-size threshold changes. Table 8 provides results for Chinese city distributions, with city sizes above 0.1, 0.2, 0.5 and 1 million inhabitants. 
The Pareto exponent increases along with the city-size threshold. This implies that urban hierarchy is less pronounced when one considers only the upper part of the rank-size distribution of the Chinese cities. Zipf’s law holds only for the largest samples, that is, those that include all cities with a population above 100 000 inhabitants. 
When it comes to Indian cities, the trends are less clear (Table 9). Whatever city-size threshold is chosen, Zipf ’s law is rejected, with the Pareto exponent values being strictly higher than 1. Close inspection of these results yields evidence of some specific shifts in Indian urban hierarchies. From 1981 to 1991, the Pareto exponent decreases for the whole sample, which means that urban concentration increased. This completely changes when one takes into account only cities with more than 1 million inhabitants. India’s city-size distribution tends to be more hierarchical, except for the group of the largest cities. 
The above results allow one to draw two comparative conclusions concerning the Chinese and Indian city-size distribution shifts over the last two decades. Firstly, the two countries’ urban hierarchies differ: India’s city-size distribution is characterized by the presence of a large number of small cities and some very large metropolises such as Bombay (Mumbai), Delhi and Calcutta (Kolkata). Zipf’s law is rejected for any city-size threshold. When it comes to the Chinese distribution, Zipf’s law holds only for the whole sample. The distribution becomes less hierarchical than what is predicted by Zipf’s law, when city-size threshold increases. Secondly, the two countries’ city-size distributions follow different trends. In China, the number of small cities strongly grows until the mid-1990s, followed, during the last decade, by an increase in the number of medium-sized cities. The larger cities’ distribution remains under the effects of anti-megacities policies. On the other hand, India’s city-size distribution tends to become more hierarchical. 
In order to study urban growth characteristics in China and India, panel unit root tests for non-stationarity in city size were run. In the presence of a unit root, the underlying trend is stochastic, which implies that a series has a long memory and shocks have permanent effects on the distribution. In this case, the series does not return to its former path, but follows a random growth path, under randomly distributed shocks, as predicted by random-growth theories. On the other hand, if the series does not contain a unit root, the underlying process is deterministic as the series has a short memory. Exogenous shocks do not have permanent effects and the distribution returns to its steady-state after a certain time (DARNE and DIEBOLT, 2005). 
The Chinese panel comprises 220 cities, and the Indian one 222 cities. For each of these cities, annual data are available from the first to the last year of the reference period. Two first-generation panel unit root tests were run: the LEVIN et al. (2002) and the IM et al. (2003) tests for both specifications (with or without trend). Table 10 provides the results. 
The IM et al. (2003) test rejects the H0 hypothesis of non-stationarity for Indian cities for the model without trend. This means that there is at least one city for which size is stationary. The non-stationarity hypothesis cannot be rejected for Chinese cities. In contrast, the LEVIN et al. (2002) test rejects H0 for both countries, which goes against the results of the previous test. 
According to HURLIN and MIGNON (2005), comparing the results of the and the or the statistics may be spurious. This leads to an abandoning of the restrictive assumption of cross-section dependence by admitting that city-size growth processes may be correlated. The CHOI (2002) and PESARAN (2007) second-generation panel unit root tests are used. Table 11 provides the results for these tests. 
Both tests reject the null hypothesis of non-stationarity for Chinese and Indian city sizes. For China, they confirm the results of the IM et al. (2003) tests. For India, they prove that it is necessary to take into account the existence of cross-section dependence in order to reach a clear conclusion. This means, firstly, that Gibrat’s law for cities cannot be entirely rejected in both countries. Secondly, in India, the urban growth processes may be correlated. Thirdly, in a more general way, the results of previous empirical studies based upon a single first-generation panel unit roots test may lead to an over-rejection of non-stationarity for city sizes and the Gibrat’s law. 
Panel unit root tests do not allow it to be concluded whether any shifts occurred to the cities’ positions within the rank-size distribution. The Markov chains are used in order to model relative urban growth and intra-distributional mobility for cities. Tables 12 and 13 deliver the results of the discretization process for the Chinese and the Indian city-size distributions. The authors proceeded to model the transition probabilities which represent the number of cities moving from one cell to another every year. Following BLACK and HENDERSON’s (2003) work, the mean first passage times were also calculated. 
The transition probabilities patterns for the Chinese cities (Table 14) are driven by two features. Firstly, diagonal elements, that is, the probability of remaining in the starting state is logically high, but off-diagonal elements are significantly different than zero. Secondly, in low city-size groups, upward mobility is higher than downward mobility, while it is the opposite for higher sizes. This is due to the anti-megacities policies and the effects of the migration restrictions until the mid-1990s. The mean first passage time matrix (Table 15) helps characterize these results. It takes twenty-one years for a city from group c1 to visit group c2 but 364 years for a city from group c4 to visit group c5. 
The authors proceeded to model transition probabilities (Table 16) and mean first passage time (Table 17) also for Indian cities. Firstly, diagonal elements are higher than those of the Chinese matrix. This indicates a higher stability in Indian urban hierarchies. Secondly, unlike China, downward mobility is higher than upward mobility, except for the larger cities. The mean first passage time matrix clearly shows that upward mobility for cities is slower in India than in China: it would take 1707 years for an Indian city from the c1 group to visit group c5 instead of 587 years for a Chinese city. Higher volatility in Chinese urban hierarchies might be because in China urban growth sources rely upon regional migration, while Indian demographics depend mainly on the natural increase in population (BHAGAT, 2005; DATTA, 2006). 
When modelling the stationary (ergodic) state, it is clear that there is no convergence process towards a single city size for both distributions. Despite anti-megacity policies in China, urban growth patterns lead to a higher instability in the country’s city-size distribution, which would match with the predictions of random-growth theories. In India, the Markov chains feature rather parallel growth patterns with small cities and large metropolises essentially remaining within their initial state group. 
This paper’s findings can be summarized as follows. Firstly, by using the Kolmogorov – Smirnov test, it is shown that the Chinese and Indian city-size distributions for cities of over 100000 inhabitants follow a Pareto law. This contradicts recent findings from some authors who argued that the city-size distribution is lognormal. The definition of a city here plays a crucial role. 
Secondly, the evolution of these two distributions over the last twenty years differs. The Chinese rank-size distribution reveals contrasting evolution between the 1980s, when small-sized cities grew faster, and the 1990s, with higher growth trends for medium-sized cities. The Indian city-size distribution systematically rejects Zipf’s law, with a Pareto coefficient higher than 1. It is characterized by a dual structure with a substantial presence of small cities and a small group of very large metropolises. 
Thirdly, when it comes to urban growth patterns, city size is not stationary in both countries. Gibrat’s principle cannot be rejected. Intra-distributional mobility is higher in China than in India, despite previous cross-region migration restrictions and anti-megacity policies. Indian urban hierarchies feature a much higher stability which could reveal parallel growth patterns. 
One of the limitations of this study is the short twenty-year period for measuring major shifts in city-size distribution. This time limitation was imposed because of data availability. However, the results deliver some interesting comparative conclusions on city-size dynamics in the two most populated countries in the world, which went through significant economic and political shifts during this period. 

