As countries experience economic development, they also tend to experience increasing urbanisation. Existing cities grow larger and new cities are formed where none previously existed. Whether the size distribution of cities changes as urbanisation progresses in a country, has been a question that has long attracted the attention of social scientists. A closely related question is whether cities experience uniform growth, or if there is churning as some cities grow faster than others. 
This paper seeks to uncover the answers to both the above questions for Malaysia, for the period 1957 – 2000. Malaysia has experienced rapid urbanisation since independence in 1957. This can be seen in Table 1. Whilst total population has increased threefold from about 7.4 million in 1957 to 22.2 million in 2000, urban population has increased eight times, from 1.8 million in 1957, to 13.7 million in 2000. This implies a rapid increase in the percentage of the total population living in urban areas, from 24.4 per cent in 1957 to 61.8 per cent in 2000. The number of cities as defined by the Statistics Department, has increased, but so too has the average size of each city. 
To describe the size distribution of cities, we use Zipf’s law, which states that the size distribution of cities follows a simple Pareto distribution with shape parameter equal to 1. Whilst there are many possible ways of describing the size distribution of cities, from measures of primacy to alternative functional forms (see for example, Hsing, 1990; or especially Cheshire, 1999, and the references therein), Zipf’s law continues to fascinate social scientists. This fascination arises for at least two reasons: first, unlike measures of primacy, it captures at least some of the properties of the rest of the urban system apart from the largest city; and, secondly, unlike more complex functional forms, it is easy to interpret. Larger values of the Pareto exponent imply more equally sized cities, smaller values less equal city sizes. 
In terms of urban growth, we begin from what appears to be the most natural starting point: that city growth is independent of city size. This is the definition of Gibrat’s law of proportionate growth. There is a close relationship between city growth and the size distribution of cities. Gabaix (1999) shows that if Gibrat’s law holds for city growth, then the size distribution of cities follows Zipf’s law; Gabaix and Ioannides (2004) discuss alternative models of urban growth that generate Zipf’s law. We adopt an approach that allows us to test whether city size is associated with its growth, or whether other factors play a more significant role. 
Our test of Zipf’s law uses both standard OLS and the Hill (1975) maximum-likelihood method for extreme values. We find that the Pareto exponent is significantly greater than 1 using OLS in 1957, but is not significantly different from 1 using the Hill estimator. In 1970 and 1980 the Pareto exponent is significantly less than 1 using OLS but not the Hill estimator, while in 1991 and 2000, the value of the Pareto exponent is always significantly less than the Zipf prediction of 1, using either method. The Pareto exponent declines over time, indicating increasing inequality in city sizes. This may have implications for policy, as increasing inequality in city sizes suggests the formation of very large cities which impact on land values and the transport infrastructure. Further, there is evidence that the size distribution of cities does not precisely follow a Pareto distribution. 
We follow up our basic Zipf regressions with a sensitivity analysis of how the value of the Pareto exponent varies with sample size. Using either OLS or the Hill estimator, the Pareto exponent stabilises at sample sizes above 30 cities, but this stabilised Pareto exponent appears to be increasing over time, implying decreasing inequality in city sizes at the upper tail of larger cities. Finally, given the apparent failure of the Pareto distribution in describing the full sample of Malaysian cities, we follow Malacarne et al. (2001) in fitting a q-exponential distribution to the observations. Unlike Malacarne et al. (2001) however, we find that the q-exponential does not fit the observed distribution very well at the upper tail and we attribute this finding to the fact that we are using much smaller samples than they do. 
Whilst there appear to be clear trends in the Zipf regression over time, there remains the question of how individual city sizes are changing over time. We explore the relationship between city size and city growth. Larger cities are found to grow more slowly than smaller cities, which suggests that small cities may attract economic activities from large cities. State capitals grow faster than other cities—an expected result given the importance of government in the Malaysian economy and the fact that many state capitals have long histories and are therefore tourist attractions. Cities in the states of Sabah and Selangor grow faster than cities elsewhere, due mainly to faster urbanisation in these states. 
The structure of this paper is as follows. Section 2 examines the size distribution of cities starting with Zipf’s law and then considering sensitivity and the q-exponential distribution. Section 3 explores city growth and Section 4 concludes. 
Auerbach (1913), Singer (1936) and Zipf (1949) demonstrated that the city size distribution could be represented as a Pareto distribution 
Or
where, x is the population of a city; y is the rank of the city if cities are ordered from the largest city to the smallest; and A and a are constants. 
In addition, Zipf (1949) proposed that the distribution of city sizes takes a special form of the Pareto distribution, with the shape parameter a, and A corresponding to the size of the largest city. This is known as Zipf’s law, although Zipf’s hypothesis might be a more accurate term. 
The classic study of Zipf’s law for a cross-section of 44 countries, was Rosen and Resnick (1980). They found, using data from 1970, that the average value of the Pareto exponent a is 1.14 and this value exceeded 1 for 32 of their 44 countries. They conclude that city sizes in most countries are more evenly distributed than would be predicted by Zipf’s law (the larger is a, the more equal are city sizes). Their findings are largely confirmed by Soo (2005), who performs a new cross-country study using updated (1990s) data on an expanded sample of 75 countries and by Nitsch (2005), who performs a meta-analysis of previous empirical findings on Zipf’s law, and finds that, on average, the empirical result has been a Pareto exponent which is larger than 1. 
Whilst many of the earlier studies on Zipf’s law simply ran an OLS regression on equation (2), Gabaix and Ioannides (2004) show, using Monte Carlo simulations, that OLS is downward-biased in this type of regression, because of the serial correlation induced by the ranking procedure used. This serial correlation also leads to underestimated standard errors. They therefore recommend the use of the Hill (1975) estimator for extreme values. Under the null hypothesis of the power law, it is the maximum likelihood estimator. For a sample of n cities with sizes this estimator is 
while the standard error is given by 
where
The Hill estimator was used by Dobkins and Ioannides (2000) in their study of the US urban system, as well as by Soo (2005). One additional result which Soo (2005) obtains, is that the Hill estimator does not always report a larger estimate of the Pareto exponent than OLS. This is likely to be due to the fact that the Hill estimator, as a maximum-likelihood estimator, is valid only when the assumptions underlying it are valid (in particular, that city sizes follow a Pareto distribution). Violations of these assumptions may lead to inferior performance relative to OLS. Gabaix and Ioannides (2004) also show that the Hill estimator is biased in small samples. 
As noted in the introduction, the data for this paper come from the census of Malaysia, conducted by the Statistics Department of Malaysia. Five census periods are used: 1957, 1970, 1980, 1991 and 2000. Cities are defined in the census as urban areas with a minimum population of 10 000. The Appendix defines urban areas as used in the census; there was a slight change in the definition of cities between the 1980 and 1991 censuses, as well as some redrawing of city boundaries over time. Using a fixed threshold for inclusion of cities in the sample means that the number of cities increases over time; this is an important feature of the Malaysian urban system. 
We run the Zipf regression (2), using OLS with Newey–West (1987) standard errors, which control for heteroscedasticity and first-order serial correlation, although it does not overcome the OLS bias noted by Gabaix and Ioannides (2004). We also calculate the Pareto exponent using the Hill estimator (3). Further, we consider, following Rosen and Resnick (1980), deviations from the Pareto distribution, by allowing for a quadratic term in the basic Zipf regression, giving 
This provides a simple check on whether the Pareto distribution is a reasonable approximation for the size distribution of cities. Finally, we also perform, following Alperovich’s (1984) argument that joint tests are more valid for testing Zipf’s law, a joint test of a and size of largest city in the basic Zipf regression (2). 
Figure 1 plots the Zipf plot, or the plot of log of city population against the log of city rank, for all five time-periods. The movement of the distribution to the right over time shows that the urban system is growing: there are both more cities in the system, and cities of every rank are increasing in size. Note, however, that this does not imply that all cities are growing at the same rate; the Zipf plot and regression are unable to uncover patterns of city growth. We return to this issue in the next section. 
Table 2 is our main table of results. Columns (1), (4), (7), (10) and (13) show the results of the basic Zipf regression (2). The value of the Pareto exponent a declined from 1957 to 1980, then remained fairly constant until 2000. In 1957, a was significantly greater than 1, but for all other years, a is significantly less than 1. This indicates that the size distribution of Malaysian cities started out being more equal than would be predicted by Zipf’s law, but became less equal than Zipf’s law over time. 
Using the alternative Hill estimator for the Pareto exponent, we find similar results; this is shown in columns (3), (6), (9), (12) and (15) of Table 2. The value of a is declining over time, suggesting increasing inequality in city sizes. However, using the Hill estimator with the correct standard errors, we reject the null hypothesis that for only 1991 and 2000, in favour of the alternative that a, 1 for both these years. Also, and similarly to Dobkins and Ioannides (2000), we find that the Hill estimates are always smaller than the OLS estimates, which is surprising since the Hill estimator is supposed to correct for the downward bias of the OLS estimate. 
The remaining columns of Table 2 present the results of the quadratic regression (5). In every year, the coefficient on the quadratic term, b, is always highly significantly negative, indicating concavity in the log rank– log population relation. This is also evident in Figure 1, where the Zipf plots are nonlinear. What this suggests is that the size distribution of Malaysian cities does not follow the simple Pareto distribution used to derive the basic Zipf regression (2). 
For Alperovich’s (1984) joint test of a and A in the basic Zipf regression, the joint null that and largest city, is rejected at the 5 per cent level in every year. Using this more stringent test, Zipf’s law fails in every year. In addition, Table 2 shows the results of several diagnostic tests. There is strong evidence of heteroscedasticity and first-order serial correlation in the residuals of the basic Zipf regression, hence justifying the use of the Newey–West standard errors. There is also strong evidence of omitted variables in the basic regression, again suggesting that the linear specification (and hence the Pareto distribution) is not the ideal functional form. 
It is frequently suggested in the literature that Zipf’s law holds only for the upper tail of the urban system; that is, for the largest cities rather than for the entire urban system. Since our previous sub-section has shown that Zipf’s law in general does not hold for the entire Malaysian urban system, one question that we may ask is: does Zipf’s law hold for some subset of the upper tail of the urban system? 
To address this question, we perform a sensitivity analysis on our results, by successively reducing the number of cities in the sample and observing the resulting impact on the value of the Pareto exponent. We do this for both OLS and the Hill estimator, and the results of this exercise are summarised in Figure 2. This shows the estimates of the Pareto exponent as the sample size is progressively reduced by removing the smallest city in the sample, as well as the proportional difference between two adjacent estimates. 
Figure 2 shows that with both estimators, but especially with the Hill estimator, the parameter values stabilise as the sample size grows larger. This is most apparent in the later years of 1991 and 2000, where there are relatively few large shocks at sample sizes greater than 30. For the Hill estimator, visual inspection of Figure 2 shows that the Pareto exponent is fairly stable at about 40 cities in 1957 (where), at 36 cities in 1970, at 26 cities in 1980, at 49 observations in 1991 and at 40 observations in 2000. Also apparent is the fact that the Hill estimates are more volatile than the OLS estimates. The Hill estimator is more sensitive to the shape of the distribution than OLS, so is more influenced by small events. 
For OLS, since the non-linearity of the distribution implies continuously changing coefficients, we compare the values of the F-statistics of the regression associated with each sample size and use these F-statistics to identify the linear regression (2) that best-fits the distribution. Our results are summarised in Figure 3. The F-statistic is maximised in 1957 at 39 cities (with), in 1970 at 10 and 31 observations (and respectively), in 1980 at 20 observations, in 1991 at 29 observations and in 2000 at 27 observations. This is an interesting finding, as it suggests that, using either OLS or Hill, the best-fit Zipf regression has an increasing Pareto exponent over time (apart from between 1957 and 1970 using the Hill estimator), which is indicative of decreasing inequality in city sizes in the upper tail. This is a different result from that obtained using the entire sample of cities. 
The result that the F-statistic of the OLS Zipf regression is maximised for these sample sizes, is in line with a visual inspection of Figure 1, where for each year it appears that the distribution is linear up to approximately log rank of between 3 and 4, which corresponds to between 20 and 54 cities. Figure 1 can also be converted (following Redner, 1998) into relative terms to enable a better comparison of the distributions, by dividing the rank by the number of cities in each year and the population by the average population in that year. This yields Figure 4, which shows that the distribution is fairly constant across census periods.
The previous sub-sections suggest that, while Zipf’s law may be a good fit to the upper tail of the Malaysian urban system, it is not the best-fit distribution for the entire urban system. Relative to the Pareto distribution, there is a lack of smaller cities, resulting in a concave Zipf plot. Malacarne et al. (2001), using data for US and Brazilian cities, argue that a q-exponential function provides a good description for the entire urban system. In this sub-section, we investigate whether this is also true for Malaysian cities. 
Defining y as the rank of a city with population x, the cumulative distribution of the q-exponential function when is 
where, r, q and a are parameters to be estimated. 
Following Malacarne et al. (2001), we first fix the value of q. We do this by comparing the residual sum of squares for a range of values of q between 1 and 2 in increments of 0.1 and using the value of q that yields the lowest residual sum of squares. This turns out to take values equal to 1.5 in 1957, 1.8 in 1970 and 1.9 in 1980, 1991 and 2000. Estimation of r and a is then carried out using nonlinear least squares using a modified Gauss– Newton iterative process.
Table 3 and Figure 5 present the results of these estimates. The q-exponential explains over 99 per cent of the variation in city populations in every year. However, as Figure 5 shows, while it fits the lower tail of smaller cities very well, the fit at the upper tail is not very good and this is especially true for the later years of 1980, 1991 and 2000. Figure 5 additionally shows that the quadratic regression (5) appears to fit the overall distribution better than the q-exponential, especially at the upper tail of the largest cities. 
One possible reason why the q-exponential does not appear to perform so well in Malaysia as compared with the US and Brazil in Malacarne et al. (2001) may lie in the sample sizes used. Whereas our sample sizes range from 44 to 171 with a smallest city size of 10 000 inhabitants, their sample sizes are well over 1000 and include settlements with fewer than 1000 inhabitants. The q-exponential may perform better as more cities are included, as Malacarne et al. (2001) suggest considering all cities in a country, whereas we are limited to cities as defined by the Statistics Department of Malaysia. 
Consideration of Figure 1 and Table 2 suggests that the overall size distribution of Malaysian cities has not changed very much since independence, apart from becoming increasingly unequal. However, it is unclear from these results, what has been the growth experience of individual Malaysian cities. Gabaix (1999) suggests that city growth follows a random process, or Gibrat’s law, so that city growth is independent of city size. This proposition has been tested for US cities by Black and Henderson (2003) and Ioannides and Overman (2003). To test whether city growth follows Gibrat’s law, we follow Black and Henderson (2003) in estimating the following regression 
Gibrat’s law implies that as well as being an i.i.d. disturbance term, so that equation (7) can be estimated using simple OLS. In this section, we focus on the full sample of cities. 
Column (1) of Table 4 presents the results; to facilitate comparisons with later results which use lagged values as instruments, we restrict the sample to be the same throughout this section. We find that, although the coefficient is negative (indicating mean reversion), city population is not a significant predictor of city growth at any conventional significance level; hence, we cannot reject the null that city growth follows Gibrat’s law. 
To explore further the factors that influence city growth, we augment regression (7) with additional explanatory variables 
where, Z is a vector containing both time varying and time-invariant variables. 
Estimation of equation (8) is by OLS and instrumental variables (IV) to address the lagged dependent variable on the RHS of the specification. We use a lagged value of log city population and lagged state population for our instruments. As long as shocks are not correlated across time, these are valid instruments for.
Table 4 presents the OLS and IV results. Column (2) presents the IV results for our test of Gibrat’s law. Comparing this with the OLS result, using IV, city population has a negative impact on city growth, which is significant at the 10 per cent level. The remaining columns of Table 4 add additional control variables to test the robustness of this result. 
In every case, city population has a negative impact on city growth; using OLS, this is significant in only one specification, whilst using IV, city population always has a significantly negative impact on city growth at at least the 10 per cent level and, in three cases out of five, at the 5 per cent level as well. Note also that the coefficient on log city population is always larger in absolute value under IV than under OLS, indicating a positive impact of city growth on city population, which is what we would expect. 
In columns (3) and (4), we include a dummy variable for whether the city is a state capital or not. There are 13 states in Malaysia, hence 13 state capitals, plus the national capital of Kuala Lumpur which we classify as a capital city. Being a state capital has a positive but insignificant impact on city growth using OLS, but a significant positive impact using IV; evidently, state capitals grow faster than other cities. Columns (5) and (6) control for the growth of urban population in the state. Since the pace of urbanisation varies across states and cities where urbanisation is more rapid would be expected to grow faster, this variable captures this effect. However, faster city growth implies faster state urban population growth by construction, since state urban 
population is simply the sum of city populations in that state. Therefore, in our IV regression we instrument state urban population growth with state urban population growth excluding the city under consideration; that is, for city j, we instrument state urban population growth 
with
We do indeed find that faster urban population growth in a state is associated with faster growth of city populations, using both OLS and IV. 
Columns (7) and (8) include a set of state dummies to control for unobserved state characteristics which may influence city growth. The omitted state is Johor. Whilst we do not report the details for brevity, the state effects are highly jointly significant, with two states (Sabah and Selangor) having highly significant positive effects on city growth; this is as expected, as these states have experienced rapid population growth and urbanisation since independence. 
Columns (9) and (10) include all the variables included in previous columns. Using either estimation method, city population has a significantly negative impact on city growth, while being a state capital has a significantly positive effect. State urban population growth has a significantly positive effect under OLS, although this is likely to be biased due to endogeneity issues. The state effects are not jointly significant under OLS, but they are jointly significant under IV; this is again mainly driven by the highly significant positive effects of Sabah and Selangor. In the IV regression, after controlling for state effects, state urban population growth does not have a significant effect on city growth; this suggests that the state effects have controlled for cross-state variation in urban population growth, which is the main source of variation in this variable. 
Table 4 also shows the effects of the time dummies included in all regressions. Because of the lagged variables used in the regression, we have effectively three periods: 1970, 1980 and 1991. With 1970 as the omitted time-period, the 1980 dummy has highly significant positive effects in almost all specifications. This time-period captures city growth between the 1980 and 1991 censuses, and illustrates the effect of the redefinition of cities between the 1980 and 1991 censuses on official city population statistics. Inclusion of the time dummies also means that all results in Table 4 control for the redefinition. 
There is also a series of specification tests in Table 4. First, we perform an F-test of the joint significance of the excluded instruments in the first-stage regression. This is always highly significant at better than the 1 per cent level, indicating that the instruments have strong effects on the instrumented variables and that we do not suffer from the weak instruments problem. Since we have more instruments than instrumented variables, we perform the Hansen (1982) J-test for over-identifying restrictions on the IV regressions. The J-test is never close to rejection at any conventional significance level. Therefore, the instruments are all jointly valid, on the assumption that at least one of the instruments is valid. We also perform the C-test for the endogeneity of city population (see Baum et al., 2003) and find that in almost every case city population is not orthogonal to the error term and hence there is a strong case for using IV to perform the regression. In columns (6) and (10) of Table 4, state urban population growth is also found to be not orthogonal to the error term, therefore instrumenting it is appropriate. 
The objective of this paper is twofold: first, to test Zipf’s law for the size distribution of cities in Malaysia; and, secondly, to explore the factors which influence city growth in Malaysia. Our main findings are as follows. First, for the entire urban system, there is some evidence that Zipf’s law held in Malaysia in 1957, but since then the urban system has evolved away from the size distribution of cities that would be predicted by Zipf’s law, to a distribution where cities are more unequal in size than would be predicted by Zipf’s law. Secondly, the Pareto distribution is found to be an imperfect approximation for the size distribution of Malaysian cities. 
Thirdly, we find that, at the upper tail, cities are becoming more equal in size to one another; that is, the Pareto exponent is increasing over time, in contrast to the falling exponent when considering the entire distribution. Fourthly, the more flexible q-exponential distribution does not appear to perform much better than the simple Pareto distribution or its quadratic extension, probably because our sample sizes are too small. 
Our final main result is that city growth is negatively related to city size, once we address endogeneity issues in the regression. That is, there is mean reversion in city growth and Gibrat’s law of proportional growth does not hold for Malaysian cities. State capitals are found to grow faster than other cities and cities in the states of Sabah and Selangor are found to grow faster than cities in other states, which reflects the fact that these states experienced the fastest urban population growth over the sample period. 
Our result on the faster growth rate of state capitals highlights the key role which government plays in the Malaysian economy. Many state capitals, by the 2000 census, had populations of well over 250 000. This raises the danger of increased congestion and environmental degradation, and points to the need for improved city planning and public transport especially mass transit systems, which currently (2006) exist only in Kuala Lumpur. The region around Kuala Lumpur is perhaps the main example of this phenomenon of urban growth; by 2000, 6 out of the 10 largest cities in the country were located in the region. 
As a final remark, we can compare the Malaysian experience of urban growth with that of other developing countries. One striking feature of the Malaysian urban system is that Kuala Lumpur, whilst it is the largest city in the country, does not dominate the urban system as in other developing countries. Kuala Lumpur is just over twice as large as the second-largest city of Klang, which is about the same size as the third-largest city of Johor Bahru. Compared with its neighbouring countries of Thailand and Indonesia, Bangkok is 16 times larger than the second-largest city of Samut Prakan, while Jakarta is over three times as large as Surabaya. Although there are issues regarding the definition of city boundaries, it still appears to be the case that other cities, in particular state capitals, play an important role in the Malaysian urban system. 
That Kuala Lumpur does not dominate the Malaysian urban system, may be attributed to the roles of history and geography. Whereas Bangkok is the natural port and transport centre of Thailand at the mouth of the Chao Phraya river and Jakarta has been a major port for several centuries, Kuala Lumpur only emerged as a city in the 19th century, initially as a tin-mining town and later as the administrative capital. It is neither a major port nor the natural transport centre of the country. Also, the somewhat unique geography of the country, spread across the Malay peninsula and North Borneo, increases the importance of local centres of administration and economic activity. 
