City size hierarchies and their distribution have attracted the attention of geographers and regional scientists since the appearance of Christaller’s [3] and Losch’s [5] seminal works. In 1958 Beckmann [l] attempted to expand on these classical works by formulating a mathematical model linking urban center hierarchies to their complementary market areas. The resulting hierarchical distribution, Beckmann stipulated, would significantly approximate a rank-size distribution of these centers. 
This paper attempts to (1) investigate the relationship between the city size hierarchies and their rank-size distribution and (2) estimate the service factor parameter k specified in Beckmann’s model. Estimates will be based on actual data from Brazil’s Southeastern region. 
Resting on the two basic assumptions that (a) the size of any city is proportional to the population of the market area it serves and (b) cities of each hierarchical order have a fixed number of centers of the next lower order, Beckmann and McPherson [2] expressed city size as a function of the size of its complementary areas.
A city of any order n would therefore have m satellite cities of the next lower order. Each center is assumed to be surrounded by a complementary market area population composed of satellite city populations of the next lower order and their complementary areas, down to the lowest order, where the complementary area would be the rural population served by each lowest-order center. 
Thus the size of each nth order center’s population can be predicted through the use of a service factor k which is specified in a “service multiplier” of the next lower order’s population. Demonstrating this model with hypothetical data, Beckmann and McPherson [2] stipulate the k, parameter to be constant, with only very minor variations from one order to another.
Thus, population size of a nth order center becomes proportional to the basic rural population served by a lowest-order center and, by means of the geometrically increasing component, the stipulated function acquires an exponential character of the type specified for a rank-size distribution 
where c is urban population, R is urban population rank, and a and b are positive parameters. 
The hierarchical pattern which most closely approximates that of Brazil’s Southeastern region is not Christaller’s, but, rather, a modified version which limits Christaller’s assumption of ubiquitous transport conditions. One of the variant patterns illustrated by Beckmann and McPherson [2], with a nesting factor of three, is in fact the one which most closely seems to approximate that of Southeastern Brazil. This assumes that nth order centers locate midway along roads linking higher order centers so that such centers are equidistant from two higher order centers rather than three, as with Christaller’s central place scheme. 
Available data provide values for the urban and rural population. Arranging our urban centers according to a nesting factor and calculating the k and s values for each order from Equations (a), (b), and (c) in footnote 2, the results shown in Table 1 are obtained. 
Complementary area populations were constructed by assuming uniform rural density and then estimating market areas so that all points would be supplied with services from the nearest center. These estimates, therefore, include only rural population in the market area, with the rural population of the region being initially divided among the number of lowest-order centers.
The rank of the median center of each order in Table 1 presents us with a negative exponential distribution. Applying logarithms to Equation (1) and substituting R in this equation for the ranks of Table 1 (second column), and substituting c for the values of the population of the median city of each order (Table I), we obtain 
where b, represents the linear slope of our hierarchical rank distribution. The results are
They indicate significance a t the one percent level of confidence and a b, value which indicates a bias towards primacy in our hierarchical order. 
Applying logarithms once more to Equation (1) we obtain 
which is the log-linear version of our rank-size equation. Applying this equation to the population and rank data for each city of our region down to the 1024th-ranked city, we obtain 
which is significant at the one percent level and has a b, value indicating a bias toward primacy in our rank-size distribution. 
The value for b (hierarchy coefficient) in Equation (2) lies within a 2.5 percent confidence interval of our rank-size regression coefficient in Equation (3). Less important, our value for the hierarchy constant, lies within a 0.2 percent confidence interval of our rank-size constant Thus, the exponential function of our hierarchical distribution approaches the rank-size distribution significantly enough to warrant Beckmann’s assumption that a mathematical relationship does exist between city size hierarchies and rank-size distributions. 
Beckmann and McPherson’s assumption of a constant service factor is, however, not borne out by the data. Our service factor values (Table 1) show much variation from order to order, even when the first (lowest) order is excluded from consideration. For our regional data a gradual decrease occurs first, for our k, values, with a sharp increase occurring at or about the level of (fifth order, Table 1). This trend is also obvious for Beckmann and McPherson’s hypothetical data (see footnote 3), albeit to a much more subtle extent. 
Two possible causes can account for this. First, our regional data have a much shorter tail-end than Beckmann and McPherson’s data, and a greater bias towards primacy resulting in a taller, or higher, front-end for our distribution. Hierarchically, this is reflected in more marked differences in median urban population from order to order for our data than for Beckmann and McPherson’s. This condition may be a particular characteristic of regional data and, especially, of primate regions. Thus, the results may well be different for city size data at the national level which will in any case have a longer tail-end and, consequently, less variance in urban population from one order to another. 
Second, the possibility remains that the service factor may not be constant at all, as specified by Beckmann and McPherson, but a variable function of the urban population of each order. If SO, it would appear that Beckmann and McPherson’s model is due for some modification. 
Finally, large variances in urban population within some orders (especially those with the larger-sized cities) may bias our estimates towards the larger or smaller-sized cities (as the case may be) within the order’s spectrum, depending on which is better represented in the median city’s population. A more precise adjustment of our hierarchy model, taking into consideration some of the region’s more peculiar deviations with respect to transport and city location, may also shed some light on the matter. This would require, however, a highly detailed study of the region’s central place hierarchy. 
This paper has presented an empirical evaluation of the relationship between urban hierarchy and rank-size distributions, and of the Beckmann model’s service parameter utilizing population data for Brazil’s Southeastern region. 
The approximation of our log-linear coefficients for the hierarchical and rank-size distributions supports Beckmann’s assumption that a mathematical relationship exists between the two functions. This goes contrary to Parr’s and Dacey’s doubts on the existence of such a relationship. Beckmann and McPherson’s assumption of constancy for the service factor, on the other hand, is not borne out by our data. 
Further research should determine whether the results obtained for our region are also valid at the national scale and for the primate and non-primate regions it comprises. Different results may well obtain for nations and regions with various levels of development and settlement patterns. It is to be hoped that this paper will stimulate more empirical analysis of central place and city size distribution patterns. 


