Since the late 1970s, China’s urban population has grown rapidly, in contrast with a decline in the country’s overall population growth due to its demographic control policy. As a result, the urban population increased from 17.92 per cent of the total population in 1978 to 42.99 per cent in 2005 (NSB, 2006). With an average annual growth rate higher than 4 per cent for nearly three decades, Chinese urban growth ranks among the most rapid in the world. More than half of the Chinese population is expected to live in cities and towns by the year 2020 (United Nations, 2004). 
This trend of recent rapid urban growth contrasts sharply with the slow or even stagnant urbanisation process observed during the 1960s and 1970s. At that time, the government control on population mobility, in particular on migration from rural areas to cities, deprived farmers of the freedom to seek employment in urban areas. In the 1980s, with the progress of economic reforms, restrictions on migration were loosened. As a result, during that decade, the urban population grew by more than 100 million, most of which was attributed to rural–urban migration (Chang, 1994). Urban growth usually takes two forms: the expansion of existing urban settlements and the formation of new ones. The rapid urbanisation process which took place in China resulted in a considerable increase in the number of Chinese cities. In 1978, China had only 193 cities. The number increased to 434 in 1988 and 657 in 2005 (NSB, 2006). Most existing cities also expanded considerably, in terms of both surface area and inhabitant numbers. 
A feature of urban growth that is worthy of notice is that large and small cities do not grow in the same way, which leads to the evolution of city size distribution. This issue has attracted considerable attention in the urban economics literature where it is argued that agglomeration economies exist, associated with city size. This means that large cities have productivity advantages over small cities. However, based on development strategies and political ideologies, city size growth in China was strictly controlled, at least since the 1960s; in particular, the growth of large cities was greatly restricted. Hence, in the pre-reform era, the city size distribution pattern was the direct outcome of central government policies and urban population grew mainly through the creation of new urban entities and the development of small and medium-sized cities. During the post-reform period, with the gradual relaxation of restrictions on migration, the rural population spread to urban areas. In the meantime, as the market mechanism was introduced into the urban economy, cities rid themselves of many administrative constraints and regained autonomy over their growth. It is believed that the urban growth process in China is increasingly subject to interactions between market actors rather than state planning. Undoubtedly, this transition in the Chinese urban system has led to accelerating urban growth. However, little is known about the recent urban growth pattern. Do cities of different sizes grow at the same rate? Or are there specific types of cities that grow more rapidly than others? 
This paper aims to examine city size distribution changes in the recent Chinese urban transition. Since large cities are believed to have productivity advantages, we hypothesised that, in contrast to the pre-reform pattern, the growth of large cities has recently accelerated to become the main source of urban growth. Thus, the specific objective of this study was to investigate whether there have been any changes in city size distribution favouring large cities during the decade of the 1990s. 
Most empirical works on city size distribution are devoted to developed economies; to our knowledge, only two recent studies are devoted to China (Song and Zhang, 2002; Anderson and Ge, 2005). This paper examines the evolutionary trend of Chinese cities during the 1990s in terms of size distribution, by using different analytical approaches. In section 2, we provide an overview of the Chinese urban system. Section 3 then gives a general review of city size distribution since 1949. In section 4, we examine the evolution of city size distribution during the 1990s, using various approaches. Finally, section 5 provides some concluding remarks. 
By the end of the year 2004, there were 661 cities in China, with a total population of 341.47 million people, or 62.9 per cent of the total urban population (NSB, 2005). Each city had an average of 517 000 inhabitants. The rest of the urban population was distributed within 19 883 towns, which had an average population size of 10 100 inhabitants. 
Among the 661 cities, there were 497 cities with less than 500 000 inhabitants. These cities represented 75.2 per cent of the total number of cities, but only 29.6 per cent of the total city population. At the other end of the urban hierarchy, 28 large cities with more than 2 million inhabitants accounted for 34.3 per cent of the total city population and, among others, the 7 largest cities with more than 5 million inhabitants accommodated 16.2 per cent of the total city population (calculated from CMC, 2006). 
In the Chinese urban system, there are three levels of cities: cities under the direct administration of the central government (zhi xia shi); cities at the prefecture level administered by provinces (di ji shi); and cities at the county level administered by prefectures or provinces (xian ji shi). In 2003, there were 4 province-level cities, 282 prefecture-level cities and 374 county-level cities. 
Studies of Chinese urban issues often encounter difficulties in finding an appropriate and coherent measure of the urban population. These difficulties stem from the frequent changes in urban area definition and the various statistics of the urban population in China. Our data are compiled from Fifty Years of Chinese City Development and the Chinese City Statistical Yearbook (NSB, several issues). The measure of city population is based on the ‘non-agricultural population’ statistic in the following analyses if not explicitly noted. Our choice is to a great extent constrained by data availability, since Fifty Years of Chinese City Development only provides non-agricultural population distribution by four size groups of all cities from 1949 to 1998, and the 1991–2001 editions of the Chinese City Statistical Yearbook only report a non-agricultural population indicator for all cities. This choice has some advantages over other measures of urban population; nevertheless, we recognise that it is not a completely accurate measure of the urban population in China. 
According to international practice, an urban population includes two components: a majority of inhabitants in the central urban area and an additional constituent in nearby suburbs. Therefore, an appropriate urban population measure should follow the place of residence principle and be based upon an accurate definition of urban areas. Unfortunately, China did not have such a measure of its urban population until at least the year 1990. There are mainly two statistics officially published as measures of the urban population before 1990 — namely, the total city and town population (TCTP) and the non-agricultural population (NAP). Neither accurately reflects the actual urban population. The former counted all people in the administrative area of cities and towns; the latter only considered people having non-agricultural hukou status. Hukou was a special household register system administered by the Ministry of Public Security, which came into force in the 1950s. Theoretically, the definition of the urban population should have been straightforward with a population register system; however, the hukou system was not merely a simple system of population registration, but was attributed special functions under the planned economy regime. The hukou system divided people into agricultural and non-agricultural categories rather than rural and urban categories. Non-agricultural hukou status yielded access to a set of privileges, including food rations, low-rent housing, education, job allocations and a social security system. During the pre-reform period, the non-agricultural population was not very different from the urban population since, initially, most of the urban inhabitants had been attributed non-agricultural hukou status. However, with the progress of economic reforms, more and more of the rural population entered urban areas, either due to the expansion of urban areas or through migration, yet only some of them acquired non-agricultural hukou status. Therefore, the non-agricultural population measure increasingly underestimated the actual urban population. 
The reason why the NAP indicator is preferred over TCTP by some authors (Wu, 1994; Song and Zhang, 2002) and even by official statistical authorities is that it remained unaffected or only slightly affected by urban area definition changes. While the TCTP measure changed significantly and included an excessive share of the agricultural population during periods of loose urban area definition, the NAP measure remained quite coherent. The evolution of the two indicators is illustrated in Table 1, where we observe that the TCTP number tripled dramatically from 1980 to 1990, a decade in which the definition of urban area was expanded to include vast suburb areas, while variations in the NAP indicator are quite stable. 
The introduction of economic reforms in China in 1978 can be viewed as a turning-point, on which a comparative analysis of urbanisation and the urban growth process in China can be based (see Figure 1). In the 
pre-reform period, the non-agricultural population of cities rose from 27.40 million in 1949 to 79.87 million in 1978, with an average annual growth rate of 4.20 per cent, and the number of cities increased from 132 to 193, with an average of 2.1 cities created each year. The average city size doubled from 208 000 to 414 000 inhabitants. In the post-reform period, the non-agricultural population of cities increased to 231.27 million in 2000, with an annual growth rate of 4.69 per cent. The number of cities rose to 664, with an average annual creation of 20.4 new cities. The average city size shrank to 361 000 inhabitants. 
Cities are usually classified into four size groups in China (see Table 2). In terms of the population distribution among these size groups, in 1978, 153 cities with fewer than 500 000 inhabitants (the two smallest size groups) and 13 cities with more than 1 million inhabitants both represented 37.5 per cent of the total population. In 2000, there were 570 cities with fewer than 500 000 inhabitants, which accommodated 46.7 per cent of the total city non-agricultural population, and the 42 largest cities with more than 1 million inhabitants represented 37.5 per cent of the city population. 
A comparison of these two phases reveals distinct urban evolutionary trends before and after 1978, although the city population grew at about the same rate during both these time-periods. Many more cities were created in the post-reform period. The growth of the urban population before 1978 stemmed mainly from the expansion of pre-existing cities, while after 1978, it depended largely on the creation of new cities. A large number of small cities was created in the post-reform period, which led to an increase in the number of people dwelling in smaller cities and the shrinking of the overall average city size. This finding is contrary to our expectations, as we anticipated finding evidence of the rapid growth of large cities during the reform period. However, given that urban growth trends do not remain stable over long periods of time, we must further examine fluctuations within each of the two periods. 
The pre-reform period can be further divided into two stages. First, there was a rapid growth stage from 1949 to 1958. This period witnessed the most rapid growth of the urban population. Fifty-two new cities were created in nine years and the average annual growth rate of the non-agricultural population was over 10 per cent. During this period, 91.1 per cent of the urban non-agricultural population growth took place in cities with more than 200 000 inhabitants, which experienced rapid growth, both in terms of the expansion of city size and the increase in the number of cities. The average city size grew from 207 619 to 329 714, an increase of 58.8 per cent. Secondly, there was a period of stagnation from 1959 to 1978, when city population and numbers increased only slightly and the number of small cities decreased. It can be seen that the urban population growth prior to economic reforms took place mainly during the 1950s, during the free migration and rapid urbanisation period at the beginning of the new republic. Urban policies changed over the next two decades by implementing restrictions on migration and controlling city size. As a result, urban growth slowed down, or even stagnated, in terms of both population and number of cities. 
The post-reform period can be divided into three stages. The first is from 1979 to 1989, during which rapid urban growth resumed. On average, 26.7 new settlements entered the city system and city population grew by 5.7 per cent each year. Of the total increase in city population, 48.9 per cent was contributed by the largest size group of more than 1 000 000 inhabitants and 31.9 per cent by the smallest size group of fewer than 200 000 inhabitants. Among the four groups, the smallest size group of cities grew most rapidly with the number of cities increasing from 93 to 276 and an annual population growth of approximately 10 per cent. In the single year of 1988, this group gained 43 new cities and a population increase of 20.3 per cent. New cities created during this period were typically small cities, since the average size of this group was only 111 410 inhabitants in 1989. At the top of the urban hierarchy, the largest-sized group also grew considerably, with the number of cities doubling from 15 to 30. The rapid growth at both ends of the urban system was attributed to the significant changes in city definition and reclassification during the 1980s. The loosening of city qualification criteria and the upgrading of districts to district-level cities led to an increase in the number of small cities but a decrease in average city size. However, the incorporation of some suburban districts into prefecture-level cities resulted in the considerable growth of large cities. 
The second phase of the post-reform urban growth period was from 1990 to 1995, when city population continued to grow at the high rate of 5.4 per cent. The number of cities increased at a slightly slower rate with 15 new cities created each year. The growth of the largest-city size group slowed down, with the addition of only one city, and the population growth rate lower than average. The two smallest-city size groups continued to grow rapidly, thanks to the continuous increase in the number of cities. Some 99 new cities entered the smallest size group and 76 new cities entered the group of 20 00 000 to 500 000 over these five years, which led to a 31.2 per cent and 58.4 per cent population growth respectively within the two groups. As a result, 63.4 per cent of the growth of the total city population during this stage came from the increase in people living in cities with fewer than 500 000 inhabitants. The overall average city size continued to shrink, reaching 31 285 in 1995. 
The third stage, from 1996 to 2001, witnessed a decline in city population growth, with an annual growth rate of 3.22 per cent. Population growth in the largest size group represented 58.6 per cent of the growth in the total city population. The growth primarily took the form of city size expansion rather than an increase in the number of cities. In fact, the total city number remained quite stable. The number of cities in each size group increased slightly, except in the smallest one. This implies that cities in all groups expanded in population size and consequently many cities moved up to larger size groups. The average city population rose from 312 000 in 1995 to 360 870 in 2001. The two largest size groups experienced the most rapid growth, both in the number of cities and in population, suggesting that a large number of small and medium-sized cities expanded during this period to become medium-sized and large cities respectively. 
In summary, city population grew continuously, without significant fluctuation, during the post-reform period. During the first 15 years, urban growth depended mainly on an increase in the number of cities while the average city size decreased. This was followed by a period during which the expansion of city size became the main source of the urban growth. 
It is also of interest to look at the evolution of the population share within each city size group. During the pre-reform period three trends are apparent. First, the largest size group maintained a high growth rate during the decade following 1949, both in terms of the number of cities and of population, until it peaked to represent 45 per cent of the total city population in 1964. After that, the percentage began to drop and rejoined the 1949 level — namely, 37 per cent of the total city population, on the eve of economic reforms. Secondly, the two middle groups experienced moderate growth, with the share of cities having 500 000 to 1 000 000 inhabitants rising from 19 per cent in 1949 to 25 per cent in 1978, and that of the second-smallest size group growing from 20 per cent to 23 per cent. Thirdly, the smallest size group was the only group that declined in terms of population share. In sum, the first 15 years of this period (1949–64) witnessed the rapid growth of the largest size group and the decline of the smallest size group in terms of population share; after 1964, the largest size group began to decline and the two middle groups expanded, reflecting the changes in urban policies after 1964 that controlled the expansion of large cities. 
From the 1980s, three trends are discernable. First, with the rapid increase of city numbers in the largest size group, the share of this group in the total population at first followed the ascending tendency to reach the peak of 42 per cent in 1989, then dropped to 35 per cent in 1997 and rose again to 39 per cent in 2001. Secondly, in contrast, the second-largest size group’s share continued to decline. This may be explained by the fact that many cities in the second size group expanded in population size and crossed the threshold of 1 000 000 to move into the largest size group. Thirdly, the proportion of population in the two smallest size groups continued to increase at high rates. The share of the smallest size group increased from 13 per cent in 1980 to 22 per cent in 1994 and, in the same year, the total share of these two groups increased to represent approximately half of the total city population. After 1995, the number of cities and the population of these two groups stopped growing, which led to a decrease in their shares and an increase in that of the two largest size groups. 
By placing these facts within the historical and political context of the Chinese urbanisation process, several features of city population growth can be observed. First, the rapid growth in city population corresponded to the short free migration period in the 1950s. In particular, the dramatic increase in the population share of the largest-size group in total city population shows the great growth potential and absorption capacity of large cities under free migration conditions. Secondly, the slow or even stagnant urban growth in the 1960s and 1970s could be attributed both to the general difficulties encountered by the national economy and to the urban policies controlling the growth in city number and population. Thirdly, the 1980s witnessed a return of rapid urban growth, resulting partly from the loosening of the restrictions on rural–urban migration. However, unlike the growth of the 1950s, urban population increase and the growth in the number of cities during this period were largely outcomes of the readjustment and relaxation of the city criterion. A large number of districts qualified as cities; meanwhile, prefecture-level cities expanded their size by enclosing suburban districts. The urban growth of the 1980s can be characterised as government-driven growth. Fourthly, and in contrast, the 1990s corresponded to a period of urbanisation increasingly driven by economic forces. The city definitions were adjusted to be more reasonable and conformed to international practice. The fairly steady city population growth stemmed from the size expansion of pre-existing cities rather than an increase in city numbers. This was the period in which the market mechanism began to play a dominant role in the economy and the national economy grew at a relative steady rate; urban population growth resulted primarily from the rational decisions of economic agents — namely, the location choices of individuals and firms. Therefore, in the next section, we focus our study of city size distribution on the period 1990–2000. 
This section studies the evolution of the Chinese urban system — namely, the change in the city size distribution and the movement of cities within the distribution — during the 1990s. This period is not long enough for the examination of long-term trends; however, since the 1980s, China has experienced unprecedented rapid economic growth. A profound transition has involved all domains in China and the urban sector has undergone great changes during this period as well. 
Over the period from 1990 to 2000, the total population of China rose from 1143.33 to 1267.43 million, or an increase of 10.85 per cent, while the urban population rose by 50.03 per cent from 301.95 million to 459.06 million. As a result, the urban population rose from 26.41 per cent to 36.22 per cent. 
As shown in Table 3, 196 cities were created during the period 1990–2000; in terms of city size growth, while the overall minimum and maximum city sizes increased by 377.4 per cent and 25.2 per cent respectively, the average size only increased slightly by 7.8 per cent, which implies that most cities created during 1990–2000 are small. Spatially, most cities were distributed in eastern regions, while western regions had fewer cities. Meanwhile, the average city size diminished from east to west. Standard deviations of city size show that middle and western cities were more evenly distributed than cities in the east. In fact, 114 of the 196 cities created during this decade are located in the east of China, which led to a decrease in average size of eastern cities. In contrast, the average size of middle and western cities increased; as a result, the disparity in terms of average city size among these regions was reduced. 
The evolution of the city size distribution over time can be examined with non-parametric kernel density estimates. Figure 2 illustrates the shape of the relative city size distributions for 1990 and 2000, based on Epanechnikov kernel estimates with sizes normalised by the average city size of the year. The relative distributions of the two years appear to be quite similar. Both are uni-modal, with relative sizes concentrated at approximately the same values. However, the degree of concentration is different: the distribution for 2000 loses density in the left and right tails and gains density in the middle relative to 1990. This suggests that the relative city sizes are more concentrated at average values in 2000 than in 1990 — in other words, they are more evenly distributed. 
It was first suggested by the German geographer Auerbach in 1913 (in Gabaix, 1999) that the size distribution of cities in a given territory follows a Pareto distribution 
where, S is a particular city population size; y is the number of cities with populations no less than S; and A and are positive constants; 
is called the power exponent, or Pareto exponent. 
Since then, the Pareto law of city size distribution has attracted considerable interest within the field of spatial economics. It is considered one of the most striking regularities in economics (Krugman, 1996; Fujita et al., 1999).
The original proposition of Auerbach was further developed by Zipf (1949), who stated that the size distribution of cities not only follows the Pareto distribution, but also takes a Pareto exponent equal to 1. The term ‘Zipf ’s law’ frequently employed refers therefore to a special form of the Pareto law where and the constant A equals the population size of the largest city in the distribution. 
Empirically, cities of a country are ranked by size in decreasing order, with the largest city numbered 1, and the smallest rank equal to the total number of cities. According to Zipf ’s law, the size of a city i, noted N, is proportional to the reciprocal of its rank, or. In other words, the product of a city’s rank and population size is a constant equal to the population of the largest city in the country. This interpretation of Zipf ’s law describes the relationship between the size and rank of the cities; it is therefore referred to as the rank–size law. 
Numerous studies apply the Pareto law in city size distribution analyses. The most often used estimation method is based upon the following regression: 
where, R and N indicate respectively the rank and population size of city i in period t; and u is an error term. The Pareto law holds for city data if the log linear regression has a good fit and Zipf ’s law is obtained for (or the Pareto exponent is not statistically different from one). 
If city size distribution follows Pareto law, the Pareto exponentImeasures the degree of population concentration in the cities of an urban system. Since is the slope of the log linear regression, a larger   indicates a steeper rank–size line, which implies that the cities of the same rank get smaller in size, given the intercept unchanged; in other words, there is a lower degree of urban concentration, or a more even city size distribution. Thus, an estimate of the Pareto exponent provides a simple way of evaluating the evenness of city size distribution, which can be used to make cross-country or temporal comparisons. A larger value of the Pareto exponent indicates in general a more even population distribution in the cities of an urban system. 
Most empirical work finds that the Pareto law regression fits city size distribution quite accurately. For example, Rosen and Resnick (1980) found that 36 out of 44 sample countries had a Pareto law regression R value higher than 0.95. Using data on French cities from 1831 to 1982, Guerin-Pace (1995) 
discovered that R values were always higher than 0.99 with a threshold of 2000 inhabitants. In contrast to the regularity of high R  values in such studies, the estimate of the Pareto exponent shows more variation. Rosen and Resnick (1980) found estimates of uranging from 0.81 to 1.96 (Australia), with a sample mean of 1.14. Nitsch (2005) made a synthesis of 515 estimates from 29 studies and found that the value of   ranged from 0.49 to 1.96, with a mean of 1.09. Based on Monte Carlo simulations, Gabaix and Ioannides (2004) stated that a value in a range [0.8, 1.2] of the exponent may indicate the success of Zipf ’s law. It is widely believed that the estimated value of the Pareto exponent is sensitive to the sample selection criteria. In cross-country studies, Rosen and Resnick (1980) found that the Pareto exponent is larger for more populous countries. Among single-country studies, Guerin-Pace (1995) showed that the evolution of the Pareto exponent for France followed an inverse U-shaped curve over time. Even for the city distribution of a country over the same period, estimates of the Pareto exponent may differ as city population definitions and sample threshold change. Based on US data, Soo (2005) found that Pareto exponent estimates tend to be smaller for urban agglomerations (metropolitan areas) than for city-proper data. Moreover, Pareto exponent estimates tend to be larger when studies consider only the upper tail distribution of city size (Black and Henderson, 2003). 
Most single-country studies focus on developed economies, especially the US, mainly due to the availability of city data. Only a few recent studies investigate the Chinese city size distribution. Song and Zhang (2002) used Chinese city data from two years, 1991 and 1998, to estimate the Zipf’s law regression. Anderson and Ge (2005) extended the sample to seven years, from 1949 to 1999. 
We applied the Pareto law estimation to Chinese city size distribution during the 1990s, in order to examine its evolution during this period of rapid urban growth. We used city data from five years selected from 1990 to 2000 — namely, 1990, 1993, 1995, 1998 and 2000. Results are presented in Tables 4–6. The top panel of Table 4 presents the full sample estimation results: all cities with available population data are included in regressions. The R value increases from 0.886 for 1990 to 0.927 for 2000, suggesting that the Pareto law regression increasingly fits Chinese city size distribution throughout this period. However, we note that recently, Gan et al. (2006) prove that a good fit of the Pareto law is only a statistical phenomenon and does not have much economic significance. The estimates of the Pareto parameter show a monotone ascending trend from 1990 to 2000, with values not significantly different from 1 for the first two years, and higher than 1 for the following three years. These results suggest that, at the beginning of the 1990s, city size distribution followed Zipf ’s law, but has become more equal than predicted by the Zipf ’s law in the second half of the decade. As shown in Figure 3, the rank– size line (apart from shifting upwards) rotated clockwise from 1990 to 2000, which suggests decreasing urban concentration, since cities at the top of the hierarchy have smaller relative size than before. 
The number of cities increased from 467 in 1990 to 663 in 2000, due to the large number of new cities that entered into the sample during this decade, although a few cities also dropped out. These sample changes may 
have influenced the overall pattern of city size distribution. In order to account for this influence, we re-estimated the equation for a balanced panel data sample: only cities existing in all five years were included in the sample. Results are presented in the middle panel of Table 4 and in Figure 4(a). The Pareto parameter still shows an increasing trend, but the values are slightly smaller than in the complete sample: they are significantly below 1 for the first three years, and not significantly different from 1 for the last two years. This finding implies that existing cities became more evenly distributed over time and the entry of new cities further augmented the evenness of the full sample city size distribution. 
According to the Chinese official urban criteria adopted in 1983, agglomerations should have at least 80 000 non-agricultural inhabitants to qualify as cities. However, not all cities in our sample fit this criterion, since many agglomerations with fewer than 80 000 inhabitants are defined as cities due to their political or administrative importance. 
We excluded these small cities by employing the threshold of 80 000 inhabitants, which reduced our sample size to between 61 (in 2000) and 87 (in 1995) cities. Results are presented in the lowest panel of Table 4 and in Figure 4(a). The Pareto parameter is significantly above 1 for all five years and the general trend increases consistently. It appears that the exclusion of small cities resulted in a more even city size distribution, better fitted to the Pareto law. 
This finding also suggests that the estimate of the Pareto exponent is sensitive to the sample threshold. To test this sensitivity further, we ran regressions on the 100, 200, 300 and 400 top cities respectively. The results presented in Table 5 and in Figure 4(b) show that, as suggested by the literature, the more we move up towards the top of the urban hierarchy, the higher the value of the Pareto exponent, which implies that larger cities are more evenly distributed than smaller ones. The increasing trend of the Pareto parameter does not change. 
Recently, Gabaix and Ibragimov (2006) argued that the conventional OLS estimate of the Pareto exponent based on model (2) is biased. They proposed a simple remedy for this bias, which was to use a shift of for the rank and run the regression as follows 
We replicated our regressions following this corrected version of the OLS Pareto law model and found that all estimates of the Pareto exponent were larger than with the standard method (see column 2 of Table 4, results for other regressions are not reported), with a difference of between 0.01 and 0.02. However, the increasing trend of the Pareto exponent from 1990 to 2000 remained unaltered. 
The fact that the Pareto parameter gets higher as we limit the sample to larger cities suggests that the relationship between rank and size may not be exactly log-linear. We can also observe in Figure 3 that the plot of rank against size in logs is of inverse-U rather than linear shape. We hence add the quadratic term of population size in log to equation (2) as 
Estimation results based on equation (4) are presented in the right-hand part of Table 4 for different samples. These confirm the non-linearity in the regression for all samples. The positive coefficient of the log city size term and the negative coefficient of its quadratic term implicate a concave regression line, just as the data plots show. The concavity of the regression line is consistent with the previous finding that the Pareto exponent estimated tends to be larger when we limit the sample to the largest cities. As mentioned earlier, the rise in Pareto exponent as the sample is limited to top cities is a common finding in the literature. The inverse-U-shaped relationship between rank and size in logs is also found in Black and Henderson (2003) for US cities and in Song and Zhang (2002) for Chinese cities. 
We then ran regressions by distinguishing the cities in the eastern, central and western regions. Results presented in Table 6 show that, throughout the period, cities in the central region were more evenly distributed than cities in the western and eastern regions. This result confirms the preliminary observation from standard errors of city size in section 2. Given that most of the largest cities are in the east and most of the smallest cities are in the west, these results are not surprising. Furthermore, the increasing trend of the Pareto exponent during the period is observed in all three regions (see Figure 4(c)). 
Since descriptive analyses suggest different patterns of urban evolution before and after 1995, we further examined the evolution of the Pareto exponent. As shown in Figure 3, we can see that the value increased more rapidly in the first half of the decade than in the second half, for all regressions except the balanced panel sample and the middle and western cities regressions. For regressions on cities of more than 80 000 inhabitants and eastern cities, increased before 1995 but decreased afterwards. As discussed in section 2, urban growth before 1995 relied mainly on the creation of small cities, which increased the evenness of the city size distribution. After 1995, the number of cities became stable and, as a result, city size distribution became less even. 
The main finding from applying Pareto law regressions to Chinese city data is that the Pareto exponent has, in general, a monotone increasing trend over the period 1990–2000 and that this trend flattens during the second half of the decade. This can be observed from most of the regressions, regardless of sample size and city criteria. The increasing Pareto exponent suggests that city size distribution in China became more equal in the 1990s, especially during the first half of the decade. Song and Zhang (2002) and Anderson and Ge (2005) have observed similar tendencies in recent Chinese city size distribution based on the Pareto law estimation. Secondly, our results confirm the conventional finding in the literature that the estimate of the Pareto exponent is sensitive to sample size and threshold and, in particular, it tends to be larger for the upper end of the sample. Finally, although the Pareto law fits Chinese city size distribution quite accurately, there exists a significant non-linear relationship between city rank and size. 
The Pareto exponent offers a general description of city size distribution by indicating the degree of urban concentration, but it does not provide information on city mobility within the size distribution. Quah (1993) proposed a non-parametric method to examine intra-distribution movements in another field. He assumed that the evolution of the income distribution across countries follows the Markov chain process, which describes a system of several states passing from one state to another with a given probability. If F indicates the distribution of incomes across countries at time t, its evolution is described by the law of motion where, M characterises the transition of one distribution to another. 
In other words, the transition matrix M gives information on the movements of points from Ft to F.  For example, two economies with a wide income level gap at time t may converge and become very close in the distribution at time; the direction and the probability of such movement are indicated by the transition matrix. This law of motion is similar to a first-order autoregression process, except that F and F are distribution vectors rather than scalars or vectors of numbers. Elements in these distribution vectors 
are distribution probabilities of respective states. In a Markov transition matrix, each element P indicates the probability that an entry originally staying in state i ends up in state j in the next period. From distributions of different periods, we can calculate the transition matrix and identify probabilities that an element passes from one state to another. This method has been applied to the city size distribution of various countries by Eaton and Eckstein (1997), Black and Henderson (2003), Anderson and Ge (2005) and others. Each element P in the transition matrix M then represents the probability that a city initially in cell i joins the cell j in the subsequent period. 
We followed this method to calculate the transition matrix of the city size distribution. 
Cities of each year were divided into five categories according to their relative population sizes — that is, the population size divided by the average population for the respective year, denoted by. As listed in 
Table 8, category cut-off points were 0.25, 0.402, 0.589 and 1.104, corresponding to quintiles of the 1990 relative city size. These cut-off points were used to divide relative city size of each year from 1990 to 2000 into five cells. Only cities existing throughout the period 1990–2000 were used, so the number of cities was 441 for each year. Distribution vectors of each period F were defined as vectors indicating the frequency of cities in each cell; the transition matrix, M, was then obtained from equation (5), tracing the movement city size distribution from period t to. 
We first calculated the average annual transition matrix — that is, the mean of annual transition matrixes of 1990–91, 1991–92, etc. Results are presented in Table 7. From the one-year transition matrix of 1990–2000, the first noticeable feature was the stability of city size distribution. All diagonal terms were superior to 90 per cent, indicating that, over a one-year period, cities of different sizes had a high probability of staying in their original size group. Moreover, all entries that were not on and not an immediate neighbour to the diagonal had a value of zero, which implies that any cities that changed size group moved from one state to a group directly adjacent to theirs; in other words, the mobility within the city system was limited to neighbouring levels of the hierarchy. These results show that, over a one-year transition period, cities remained fairly stable in their relative size distribution. 
Values of diagonal terms of a transition matrix provide information about the concentration trend of city size distribution. 
We find that groups 4 and 5, the two largest size groups, had the highest diagonal values, indicating that large cities had the highest probability of remaining in their initial size group. Group 2 and group 3 had the smallest values and, judging from their off-diagonal terms, cities in these two groups had a stronger tendency to move up to larger size groups. Thus, the annual transition matrix suggests a trend of concentration in the upper end of the urban system hierarchy. However, this trend is not pronounced, as all diagonal terms are higher than 0.9 and do not differ significantly from each other. 
Since the preliminary analysis in section 2 found that the urban growth trend reached a turning-point in 1994, we calculated the average annual transition matrix for 1990–94 and 1994–2000. We did not find significant changes in the transition patterns of these two sub-periods (results are not reported here). 
We then calculated the transition matrix for the 10 years between 1990 and 2000 (see Table 7). Diagonal terms were much smaller than for the annual transition matrix, since city size distribution experiences more variation over a 10-year span than in a single year. The 10-year transition matrix showed a clearer trend: among the five groups, cities of groups 4 and 5, or the largest cities, had the highest probability of remaining in their original size groups, and the middle group, group 3, had the smallest probability (59.1 per cent) of persistence. Furthermore, we noticed that cities in groups 2 and 3 were more likely to move up than down in the size hierarchy; in other words, cities of groups 1, 2 and 3 were more likely to expand in size and join larger size groups. The final frequency distribution in 2000 shows that groups 4 and 5 became the two groups containing the most cities. It appears that small and medium-sized cities grew rapidly to join the two largest size groups; cities tended to concentrate in these two largest size groups. 
Although the concentration trend of cities in groups 4 and 5 is clear, cities in these groups are not necessarily large cities: the lower thresholds of groups 4 and 5 are only 194 000 and 364 000 inhabitants, given the small sizes of most cities in the full sample. These can hardly be described as ‘large cities’ according to international criteria. Therefore, in the interest of gaining more information about transition patterns of large cities, we limited the sample to the prefecture- and province- level cities, which include most of the large and important cities in Chinese urban system. There were 166 cities of this type existing from 1990 to 2000, with average sizes much larger than for the full sample. We followed the same steps as for the full sample; results are reported in the lower part of Table 7. The annual and the 10-year transition patterns from 1990 to 2000 for this category of city were very similar to that of the full sample: the two largest size groups had higher values of diagonal terms than the three smaller-size groups and groups 2 and 3 had a higher probability of moving up in the hierarchy. The difference was that diagonal terms were, in general, larger than for the full sample, which implies a higher persistence of relative size distribution for this category of city. Furthermore, the highest value of the diagonal term appeared in group 4 instead of in group 5. We can conclude that cities tended to concentrate in the two largest size groups, particularly in the second-largest size group, which contains the cities closest to the average size (from 0.769 to 1.338 of the average size). As shown in Table 8, group 4 gained the greatest number of cities in the final distribution of 2000, confirming that relative city size tends to concentrate at the mean value. The ergodic distributions which predict the long-run state suggest similar trends to those of the transition matrices. In particular, prefecture-level cities are concentrated in groups 4 and 3, and group 4 contains more than half of the cities. 
Our aim was to study the growth trend of cities of different sizes. The Pareto law estimation analysis suggests that city size has become more equally distributed; in other words, there is a decreasing concentration tendency in the city size distribution and cities of different sizes tend to converge in terms of relative population size. In the economic growth literature, the convergence term refers to the idea that economies of different growth levels converge in the long run to their steady growth states. Empirically, the test of convergence serves to estimate the dependence of the economic growth rate on the initial growth level. A convergence tendency is obtained when the coefficient is negative, which indicates that poor economies grow faster than rich economies. Analogously, we can test the existence of convergence tendency in city size growth by running regressions on the city size growth rate at its initial size level, in order to know whether small cities grow faster than large ones. 
Economic growth convergence literature states that the long-run steady states towards which countries tend to converge are not single because they are conditional on certain structural characteristics of countries. Similarly, we can presume that in city size growth, the long-run size towards which cities tend to converge is not single and is conditional on some city characteristics. These presumptions are confirmed by models in urban economics (Henderson, 1988), which predict that cities in an urban system may have different equilibrium sizes. In these models, city sizes are determined by the interactions between external economies and diseconomies associated with urban concentration; the diseconomies depend on the overall size of a city, but the external economies vary with the industrial structure of cities, so at equilibrium, cities specialised in different industries arrive at different optimal sizes. 
The test of convergence can be based on the following equations 
where, N denotes the city population and X is a vector of city characteristics. 
We used equation (6) to examine the ‘absolute convergence’ tendency in city size growth and the ‘conditional convergence’ tendency was examined using equation (7). Since data on city characteristics were only available for prefecture- and province-level cities, equation (7) could only be used within this category of cities. 
The estimation of equation (4) constitutes a test of Gibrat’s law, a possible explanation of the emergence of Zipf’s law. Gibrat’s law assumes that cities’ growth rates have the same mean and same variance disregarding their initial sizes. If cities follow theses homogeneous growth processes, they will converge to the steady state where their size distribution follows Zipf ’s law (Gabaix, 1999). Gibrat’s law implies therefore that and, against this hypothesis, we test whether there is a mean reversion or a convergence tendency in the population size growth, so that. Results are presented in column (1) of Table 9. 
The estimate of is significant with a negative coefficient, rejecting the hypothesis implied by Gibrat’s law and confirming the mean reversion in the growth process. This result is consistent with the finding of a non-linear rank–size relationship in the previous section. As Gabaix (1999) and Black and Henderson (2003) suggest, the non-linear relationship can be explained by the different variances of cities — that is, large and small cities are subject to different relative shocks, with the variance of shocks decreasing in city size. We also include regional dummies and city-level dummies in the regression (column (2)). 
The effect of initial population level on subsequent growth rate remains significantly negative. County-level cities have lower growth rates than prefecture- and province- level cities. As for regional differences, eastern cities grow faster than cities in the rest of the country and western cities have the lowest growth rates. 
Additionally, we tested the convergence with two other forms that stand for city size in 1990. First, we used the size ranks of cities, which equal one for the largest city and n for the smallest one, n being the sample size. Results are reported in columns (3)–(6) of Table 9. Although this measure of city size explains less of the variation in city growth, the positive and significant coefficient of the size rank in log confirms the negative correlation between the growth and the initial size. Secondly, we replaced the population size by the dummies of quintile size ranking in 1990. These are four dummies with the ‘dummy quintile 1’ equal to 1 for the top quintile (the largest) and the dummy omitted for the bottom quintile (the smallest). Columns (4) and (5) present regression results, with or without city-level and regional dummies. We observed that coefficients for quintile ranking dummies increase monotonically as we move down from the largest quintile, although losing statistical significance for the fourth quintile (the second-lowest). This suggests that the growth rates increase from the largest cities to the smallest, and conforms to the convergence tendency found in the previous regressions. 
Next, we limited our estimation to province- and prefecture-level cities. To give a comparison, we followed the same estimation steps as with the complete sample. Relative city non-agricultural population growth was regressed on the three forms of initial population measures, with and without city-level and regional dummies. Results reported in Table 10 suggest, in general, the same conclusion. First of all, the same mean reversion of city population growth can be found in all of these 
regressions. Moreover, population growth of these cities is better explained by initial city size than for the full sample, given that the R values are far higher. In fact, 36 per cent of the variation in size growth of these cities can be explained by differences in their initial size. As for regional differences, cities in coastal regions have the highest growth rates and cities in western regions the lowest. Capital cities and provincial-level cities are found to grow faster than other cities. 
Control variables were then introduced into the regression to test the conditional convergence hypothesis (Table 11). Besides city-level and regional dummies, we introduced GDP per capita to control for the economic development level, the ratio of FDI to GDP for open degree, surface of paved road per capita for infrastructure level and the ratio of labour between secondary and tertiary sectors for the industrial structure. After controlling for all these variables, the initial population level still had a negative impact on the city size growth. Basic regression results were similar when the sample was divided into eastern (column (1a)) and inland cities (column (1b)). We can conclude that there is a conditional convergence in city population growth. These regressions were then replicated with another definition of the population: the total city population. The coefficient of the initial population size remains significant and negative, although the explaining power of the overall regression and some control variables are different. It seems that, besides initial population level, non-agricultural population growth is more likely to be determined by infrastructure level, while total urban population growth is influenced by the economic development level. 
The negative impact of the initial size of cities on their growth is found to be significant in all of our regressions. This result is quite robust, regardless of urban population definition, sample division or estimation model. We can conclude that the convergence tendency is quite persistent in Chinese city size growth processes from 1990 to 2000. 
Based on population data for Chinese cities, particularly over the period 1990–2000, we examined the evolution of city size distribution, using different analytical approaches. The Pareto law estimation revealed the increasing trend of the Pareto exponent, suggesting that the distribution of city size became increasingly even during this period. 
Analyses on the transition of cities through the size distribution showed a tendency of concentration around the mean size, with small cities tending to move up in the size distribution. Finally, parametric regressions revealed the negative correlation between city population growth and initial size, indicating the significant convergence tendency of population growth rates, which may be conditional on other city characteristics. 
These findings based on different analyses show that small cities were more dynamic than large cities in terms of growth during the period 1990–2000, which leads to the increasing evenness of the overall city size distribution. Contrary to our expectations, there is no evidence that city size distribution changes during this period of rapid urban growth favoured larger cities. The fact that large cities experienced slower population growth may be attributed to negative externalities associated with population concentration. Increased costs associated with congestion in large cities may slow down the rate of population increase, while small and medium cities are able to maintain high population growth rates without getting excessively congested. Some other factors suggested by the literature — for example, technology and industrial structure — may also have an influence on city size growth. According to Glaeser et al. (1995), real convergence in income growth may occur because technology progresses more slowly in more advanced economies. Similarly, less developed cities (usually the smaller ones) can benefit from rapid technological progress and grow faster than more advanced cities. Urban theory also highlights the link between urban specification and long-run city size (Henderson, 1974; Fujita et al., 1999). As Black and Henderson (2003) argue, changes in industrial structure affect the relative growth rates of cities. Since many cities, especially large cities that had been manufacturing bases, underwent important industrial restructuring in China during the 1990s, their relative growth rates may have been slowed. 
Besides the impact of such market forces, we believe that city size growth in China is also influenced by non-market behaviour, in that urban patterns are still partly shaped by government policies. The relatively lower growth rates of large cities are probably related to the remaining control policies on city size. In fact, although restrictions on rural–urban migration have been greatly relaxed, the policy of containing the expansion of large cities since the pre-reform period has been, to a great extent, inherited in the post-reform period. Rural-urban migration was first legitimised in small and medium-sized cities, while large cities remain the most reluctant to open the door to rural migrants. In 1990, the Urban Planning Law legitimised the guidelines for city development as “containing strictly the size of large cities and develop rationally medium-size cities and small cities”. The control on city size is maintained through migration restrictions to large cities, as well as discrimination against rural migrants in labour markets. 
Chinese restrictive urban policies stem from excessive concern about negative effects associated with increased city sizes, such as congestion, pollution and social problems. Accordingly, productivity advantages related to city size are somewhat neglected in urban policy decisions. The first study to estimate agglomeration economies in Chinese cities, Au and Henderson (2006) found that the majority of Chinese cities are undersized, which results in large losses in GDP. Still a predominantly rural society, China will experience considerable rural–urban migration in the years ahead in order to realise its transition to a modern industrialised economy. The continuing rural migrant influx will exert great pressure on cities both in terms of job opportunities and living facilities. Because of their productive advantages and greater capacity for labour absorption, large cities should represent the majority of urban growth. Large cities are also more efficient in terms of environmental sustainability. First, large cities usually have higher population densities than small cities, which encourages the economical use of land — a relatively scarce resource in China. Secondly, industrial agglomerations in large cities are likely to generate less pollution (on average) than if they were dispersed throughout small cities. Moreover, large cities allow the more efficient utilisation of infrastructure than small cities because of urbanisation economies. 
The main argument against city size growth is the congestion effects that it generates. Although congestion effects increase with city size, they also depend to a great extent on the quality of urban planning and management. In so far as positive externalities related to city size growth outweigh negative externalities, urban policies should not focus on restricting city size, but on improving urban planning and the management of local public goods. 

